  
1  
  
Swiss IGF 2022  
Messages from Bern  
2 June  2022  
 
Final  version  
 
 
Plenum 1: ‘Regulation’ of artificial intelligence  – What is Switzerland doing ? 
• There is a need for regulation; waiting for the adoption of standards in the EU puts 
Switzerland at a disadvantage; active involvement in international discussions, 
especially at the Council of Europe, while at the same time developing its own 
national solutions is appropriate approach.  
• The setting of ethical standards by companies themsel ves is not sufficient to meet the 
need for regulation; binding legal rules are needed.  
• A combination of technical standards (at the international level) and national law with 
appropriate, technology -neutral rules, e.g. with regard to liability and to preve nt 
discrimination, seems to be the way forward.  
• A distinction should however be made between state and private  actors.  
• The EU's draft AI regulation should be understood against the background of 
safeguarding the single market; Switzerland has different re quirements and should 
adopt a more open approach (like e.g. USA, UK, Japan, Singapore).  
• Observation and monitoring mechanisms are important; (publicly funded, 
independent) supervisory authorities or an observatory are conceivable, possibly also 
(informatio n or AI) auditing bodies for companies.  
 
Plenum 2: Platforms: Political -economic challenges and their regulation  
• Social media are an increasingly important source of information, especially for young 
people, and influence the opinion -forming process. Platforms should take 
responsibility accordingly. Platform operators try to fulfil this responsibility by applying 
their own measures, but more needs to be done.  
• When fundamental rights are concerned, the outsourcing of state tasks must be 
conside red and regulated in a nuanced manner, e.g. restrictions on freedom of 
expression. Due consideration when regulating must be given to proportionality and it 
is important to also consider the context or specific content (e.g. voting campaigns).  
• Currently, t here is insufficient access to platform data and little understanding of how 
it works. Better access is therefore needed, especially for researchers, as is already 
happening at the European level.   
• Domestically, Switzerland can do more in terms of capacit y building and building 
digital and data literacy.   
• Internationally, it is important to identify and make the most of any scope for action 
and to take international proposals as a basis for the domestic policy debate and to 
conduct it proactively.  
 
  
2  
  
Plenum 3: Data -based society and political sovereignty  
• The digital world has produced a high degree of interdependence and 
interconnectedness in which it is difficult to insist on classical sovereignty or 
autonomy. Various trade -offs have to be weighed up,  e.g. efficiency through 
centralisation vs. security through decentralisation.  
• Data provides enormous potential in various areas of society and the economy, such 
as health, mobility, energy, education, etc. Experiences with search engines, hotel 
booking pl atforms, etc. show that data -based platforms offer an efficient way to satisfy 
individual needs.   
• Platforms will become established in further areas. Due to economies of scale, a 
tendency towards monopolies is likely. Platforms can become systemically rel evant 
and displace the traditional players in the sectors. The question arises as to how 
democratic control can be achieved.   
• Data use requires trust, which is currently lacking. Prototypes could be used to create 
trust on a small scale and then scale up the dataspaces. In addition, a new culture of 
cooperation across administrative silos and among competing companies is needed 
to agree a set of rules.  
• With the Data Governance Act, the EU has adopted a regulation for trusted data 
spaces. Switzerland must n ot miss the boat. A report by OFCOM and the FDFA 
therefore envisages, among other things, a code of conduct for dataspace operators.  
 
Workshop 1: Digitalisation and sustainability - opportunities and risks  
• On the one hand, digitalisation helps to achieve large energy efficiency potentials. 
However, because energy demand is continually growing, there is a risk that rebound 
effects (increased demand) will wipe out the gains derived from efficiency 
improvements.  
• A large proportion of the emissions cau sed by Switzerland are generated abroad. In 
order to measure the actual impact of the digital world (production, use and disposal 
of infrastructure, devices, etc.) on the environment and to be able to address our 
international responsibilities, we need a s olid data basis and transparency over the 
entire life cycle.  
• Collaborations between the private sector, civil society and the state are key, whereby 
Switzerland, with its experience with complex governance models, can lead the way 
as a model.  
• Even with an incomplete data basis, sustainability by design and a more sufficient use 
of energy can be propagated.  
 
Workshop 2: Cybersecurity and cyber competence  
• Cybersecurity is not a state, but a process. A high level of cybersecurity is the basis 
for successful digital transformation.  
• Cybersecurity needs human and financial resources. There is a need for skilled staff 
(from interns to CEOs) who are not only technically trained but also generally aware 
of cybersecurity. There is a need to invest in the training and integration of young 
professionals to reduce the skills gap.  
  
3  
  
• We are faced with the paradoxical challenge of building secure systems from 
insecure components and operating or using them safely. Existing security gaps, both 
in the systems and in  their use, provide a breeding ground for cybercrime.  
• There are various approaches to strengthening cybersecurity, from voluntary labels to 
legally binding standards. Their application is recommended for critical 
infrastructures, but also for all other are as. However, there is no legal obligation to 
apply security standards and this should be discussed. Insurance companies could 
also provide incentives to implement established standards as part of risk 
management.  
• Machine learning systems can be mis directed  by distorted input data. This can lead to 
wrong decisions being taken which in turn can have devastating consequences. AI 
systems can also be used defensively and of fensively in the field of cyber security.  
 
Workshop 3: Digital partic ipation  
• Digital participation is in fact participation in society. Our society is in  fact a hybrid, 
already mixing analogue and digital at all levels of our lives. To participate fully, we 
need to be able to rely on increasingly demanding digital skills, including data li teracy.  
• The question is no longer really one of identifying the skills that are needed - there 
are reference frameworks, such as that of the EU - but instead of determining the 
level of expertise that needs to be acquired, who is responsible for transmitti ng these 
skills to the population and how to reach all audiences.  
• One course of action is to strengthen collaboration, particularly between cities and 
their libraries. Indeed, each in their own way, they reinterpret existing common 
spaces to offer training  opportunities open to all.  
• Like the hybrid society, it is important to fluidly articulate the link between the local 
community and our involvement - whether desired or not, it is always real - in a global 
digital reality.  
 
 
 
Messages from Bern  
'Messages from Bern' provides a short, concise and unbiased summary of the main points 
covered during the plenary sessions and workshops at Swiss IGF 2022. They will be 
submitted to the global 'UN Internet Governance Forum' (IGF) and th e 'European Dialogue 
on Internet Governance' (EuroDIG) so that they can be used to enrich discussions taking 
place in these forums.  