Future-proofing the Digital Transformation
How do we need to rethink the tenets of digital transformation and tech 
regulation to address global inequalities ?
Submission to the Global Digital Compact
by SUPERRR Lab
April 29, 2023
1

Content:
1. Digital Transformation Without Direction: Core Issues of Digitisation and Global 
Inequalities
2. Recommendations for a Futures-oriented Digital Transformation
3. Appendix: A Conceptualisation of a Feminist Digital Policy Framework
2
1. Core issues of digital transformation and global 
inequalities
Despite all hopes, the digital transformation fails to deliver on the many promises of 
universal access and increased equality. One of the core reasons lies in the fact that 
tech policy is still often thought of and shaped as economic policy. This leads to a 
number of negative outcomes: Innovation happens for innovation’s sake rather than 
being prioritized and regulated towards decreasing inequalities. Regulation instead 
happens after the fact, when disruptive technologies have already made it to the 
market. While tech already does damage that impacts the marginalized and under-
resourced groups the hardest, regulators are still figuring out the right ways to reign 
in these new developments. 
The result is tangible: Lack of access, insecure communication and IT infrastructure, 
digital public or basic services that are unusable for those that most need them, 
extractive industries that pollute the planet, online surveillance, digital stalking, hate 
speech, massive disinformation and online slander campaigns. All of them mostly 
affect those that are already at risk. As a result, the way how the digital 
transformation is shaped now continues to exacerbate social inequalities.
We call on the Global Digital Compact to systemically reframe digital policy as social 
policy and adopt an approach that diligently assesses global, societal and 
intergenerational risks, follows core feminist values, and strives to raise the ground 
for all instead of raising the ceiling for the few. 
We call on the Summit for the Future to adopt foresight formats and to actively 
enable civil society stakeholders to take part in them.
2. Recommendations:
Adopt societal risk assessments to inform tech regulation and make use of 
foresight methods to create future-ready digital policies and digital solutions.
Preserve fundamental rights in the digital world by providing access and 
means to participation and by fostering safe and secure digital infrastructure.
Include experts from civil society and academia early on and continuously in 
consultations and negotiations. 
Evaluate feminist approaches like the feminist digital policy to digital 
policymaking to address power inequalities in the digital sphere.
3
3. Appendix: A Conceptualisation of a Feminist Digital 
Policy Framework
A feminist tech or digital policy analyses existing social power 
relationships and works to promote equity.
Definition
Digital policy is social policy that addresses social issues such as accessibility, active 
participation, sustainability and equity. This requires an intersectional feminist 
approach to focus on those societal groups that are most affected by the negative 
consequences of digitisation. Feminist digital policy stands for a paradigm shift: 
Away from “higher, further, faster” to “more sustainable, equitable, people-centred”.
Why do we need a feminist digital policy?
When digitisation is discussed today, it is usually within an economic context: It 
serves as an instrument to optimise processes and reduce costs. But such narratives 
ignore sociopolitical dimensions. As long as digitisation theory and practice remain 
focused on innovation and efficiency, they ignore the needs of numerous people.
The consequence: Certain groups within our society are particularly strongly 
affected by negative digitisation effects. Because digitisation not only perpetuates 
existing discrimination patterns and inequity, it also consolidates and reinforces 
them.
For example, not all people have equal opportunities to access new technologies. The
well-off, able bodied, educated, younger people and those who do not (have to) 
provide care services are clearly privileged in this respect.
Digitisation reproduces and deepens existing social inequalities in regards to access 
to digital services, presence and visibility on platforms as well as discrimination 
through algorithmic decision making. The manner and type of digitisation therefore 
has a significant influence on social participation, access to knowledge and 
education, and equity.
Digital policy should thus not be solely focused on economic aspects – particularly 
not in times of climate crisis, threats to democracy and resource shortages. It must 
aim to protect fundamental rights and deconstruct social inequities.
4
What does feminist digital policy do?
Our aim is to create futures that are characterised by accessibility, active 
participation, sustainability and equity. By applying an intersectional feminist 
approach, we are capable of looking and thinking beyond existing narratives and 
structures.
Feminist digital policy examines digitisation macro-socially and analyses it with 
respect to discriminatory patterns and power structures. It looks critically at 
whether technology is used appropriately and practically.
Feminist digital policy delivers context-based solution approaches. These contexts 
are subject to change, and so the solution approaches also need to be continuously 
evaluated.
Feminist digital policy is a policy of nuances. It is uncomfortable because it does not 
offer easy solutions, and it is honest because it actively points out the gaps.
Feminist digital policy is a (learning) process and not an agenda. There are no simple 
answers to the complex challenges posed by digitisation – ongoing demands and 
promises can never really be fulfilled.
Observation levels in feminist digital policy
The process behind feminist digital policy is accompanied by an iterative 
consequence evaluation of specific (legislative) projects. This process goes far 
beyond purely technical and legal analysis, and looks at three levels:
Global:Digital policy projects in Germany or the EU always have global impacts or 
even have a specific claim of being globally effective. Additionally, they are planned 
and implemented in a post-colonial context, allowing Europe to profit from its 
dominant position. This is why digital policy actors should always evaluate their 
actions within a global context, support solidarity and ensure that power imbalances 
are reduced wherever possible.
Social:The consequences of digitisation must be evaluated for the entire society – 
within the context of existing inequalities. Based on this, decision-makers should 
prioritise measures that benefit those who are most negatively affected by the 
impacts of digitisation. This process, orientated along the guideline “from the 
margins to the centre”, necessitates continuous checks, reflection and 
modifications.
Systemic:Judiciary and executive power structures must be critically examined and 
must not be strengthened by digital policy projects. This is why safety mechanisms 
must be installed to counteract any expansion of power, surveillance measures and 
the weakening of fundamental rights.
5
What is our vision?
Feminist digital policy aims to shape desirable futures in which society itself is not 
digitally transformed, but where digitisation contributes towards social-ecological 
transformation.
How do we achieve this?
By influencing discursive change: We are working on ensuring that digital 
policy is viewed as it should be: As a civil and equitable challenge.
Opening up political processes: We are working towards a clear 
acknowledgement by political decision-makers that they will actively include 
civil society organisations in their expert committees and open up consultation
processes for civil society actors.
Ensuring that necessary expertise is a prerequisite: We aim to promote 
continuous exchange of knowledge between authorities and civil society 
actors. This requires a change in attitude and behaviour on the part of the 
authorities. Because, all too often, relevant debates only include civil society 
actors at a late stage, too late or even not at all.
First published on https://feministtechpolicy.org/en/ , an initiative by SUPERRR Lab. 
6