The LEGO Group
Submission to the Global Digital Compact
Thank you for the opportunity to submit to the UN Global Digital Compact (GDC), The
LEGO Group considers the GDC an important initiative to address the challenges and
leverage the opportunities presented
by the digital era.
Despite the increasing presence of technology in their formative years, children's needs
and voices have been historically absent in the online world. While we support wider
initiatives to improve connectivity, avoid fragmentation and create a more open and
accountable internet, our submission is focused on the need for the GDC to encourage
the design of digital services that not only protect children but also respect their
rights and promote their well-being. We believe it should be the shared ambition of
the global community that a// children have the opportunity to participate in safe digital
experiences that help them grow, build 21% century skills and achieve their potential.
The LEGO Group
At The LEGO Group, children are our role models. The rights, safety, and wellbeing of
the millions of children we engage with every day are of paramount importance. We
recognize that the protection of children is a fundament right as set out in the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Children (UNCRC) and are committed to imbedding the
values set out in that instrument, being the first toy company to sign up to the 10
Children's Rights and Business Principles as well as the first firm to launch and
implement a Child Safeguarding Policy.
With children more online than ever, each new generation has the capacity to be digital
natives. Digital play is now increasingly important for friendship building, learning about
the world, and the development of 21st century skills like creativity, problem solving
and critical thinking. However, to help children reach their potential, we must give them
the opportunity to grow in safe virtual playgrounds. This is why in 2016 we introduced
an industry-first Digital Child Safety Policy and created the Child Online Safety
Assessment tool alongside UNICEF to help other companies raise the bar in online
safety. Recently, we have adopted the LEGO® Digital Child Rights & Well-being
Principles, a series of commitments on online safety, empowerment, privacy and well-
being based on the UNCRC. Our approach to child safety goes beyond protecting
children online however, we firmly believe connected technologies can empower kids
to become responsible digital citizens and equip them with the skills needed to thrive
in the digital era.
Digital experiences for children should be designed with safety front of mind
As a vulnerable group in society, technology can pose particular risks for children.
Unfortunately, harmful content, conduct and exploitative practices too often typify the
experiences of many children online. Given that the risks of the digital world can
disproportionately affect children (as both susceptible populations and ‘early adopters’
of new technology),
they require enhanced
and
that technology works in their best interests.
proportionate
protections to ensureAt The LEGO Group, we know there are both commercial and ethical imperatives to
designing responsible digital experiences for children and firmly believe that fun
shouldn't (and doesn't have to) come at a cost to child safety. Our LEGO® Life app, a
social-themed platform that inspires children to build and share their creations, embeds
safety in all aspects of product design whilst still allowing for creative expression. To
mitigate risk on the platform, content is pre-moderated before it goes live and users are
guided through the app via age-appropriate language, with safety avatars advising
children on how to have a positive and respectful online experience.
The need for safe online environments is already embedded in international frameworks.
General Comment 25 commits states parties to ensure that digital experiences for
children adhere to the highest standards of ethics, privacy and safety in the design,
development, and implementation of online products. The OECD Recommendation on
Children in the Digital Environment also recognises the acute risks children can face
online, and recommends that states adopt legal frameworks that mitigate harms
suffered by children. While we commend efforts to address these risks through age-
appropriate design frameworks and balanced online safety laws, we also urge states to
harmonise regimes and reduce regulatory fragmentation.
As the instrument outlining ambitions for an open, free and secure digital future, we
believe the GDC should reflect the well-established principle of digital safety for
children and encourage both states and digital service providers to proactively
protect children online.
Online services must respect the rights of children
The UNCRC recognises the right of children to privacy, freedom of association,
expression and, importantly, play. These (and other rights) translate directly into the
digital world.
In the internet era, childhood moves fluidly between the digital and physical, with the
social lives, entertainment and educational needs of children increasingly found online.
As such, the need for online safety must not disproportionately restrict a child's
recognised right to access information and participate in positive digital soaces where
they can grow, develop and express themselves. This position is supported by
international instruments like General Comment 25 which calls for states parties to
support a child's right to online participation, association and play, noting the
constructive role that online playgrounds can have for the social development of
children.
We believe governments and service providers can do more to fulfil this obligation and
support children to realise their rights online. That is why The LEGO Group has created
fun, interactive resources (like LEGO® 'Doom the Gloom’ and our ‘Build & Talk’
experiences) to help families stay digital smart and engage in positive digital play. We
are also undertaking research in Australia, South Korea and India to understand how
industry and public authorities can help children be model digital citizens that
participate fully and responsibly in digital life. This work has often revealed how much
remains to be done to widen understanding of concepts such as digital footprints,
privacy and respectful conduct and the need for institutions to prioritise the responsibleexercise of childrens rights online whilst enabling appropriate access to the digital
world.
The GDC should emphasize the shared commitment of the international community to
respect the rights of children online, including freedom of association, privacy,
participation, and play. Respect for children's rights in online environments is a
fundamental pillar for a digital future designed with the best interests of children in
mind.
Digital worlds must balance protection of harm with promoting the well-being
of children
In an age where many children have ubiquitous access to the tremendous opportunities
the internet can offer (according to UNICEF 1 in 3 internet users are children),' it is not
enough to ensure that services are safe, enabling and empowering - governments and
providers should also design online experiences that promote a child's well-being.
The concept of well-being has long been synonymous with the overall health of a
person, with the World Health Organisation defining health as not just of the absence of
disease but also a ‘state of complete,
physical, mental and social well-being’.* Well-
being has also widely been accepted as a key component of experiences that are in
‘best interest of the child’ and is increasingly recognised as an important factor in
creating positive online environments for kids. * These conclusions are finding growing
support within international fora like the UN, OECD, Council of Europe which highlight
how digital technologies can improve child health and well-being, including by
contributing to the social development of children and helping marginalised kids
explore their communities and connect with peers.* We believe the now established
expectation to prioritise child well-being online obliges states and firms to imbed the
concept into child-facing digital services and implement inclusive policies.
To help industry on this mission, The LEGO Group joined forces with UNICEF in 2022 to
form the Responsible Innovation in Technology for Children (RITEC) project. This data
driven initiative worked with children across 13 countries to develop an understanding
of well-being. It is now working to equip businesses and policymakers with the tools to
build digital worlds that not only mitigate harm but also empower children, nurture
creativity, build competence, promote diversity and inclusion, develop emotional
regulation, foster social connection and help them self-actualize. The emerging findings
of this project — that digital services which place children at centre of their design can
positively influence well-being - are supported by a growing body of work that
emphasises the importance of responsible free play in digital worlds (see the Playful by
' See ‘Growing Up ina Connected World', UNICEF
2 See World Health Organisation Definition.
5 General Comment 14 of the UNCRC as well as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees have closely
associated the core concept of ‘best interests of the child' with a child's overall well-being, stating ‘the term “best
interests" broadly describes the well-being of a child.....determined by a variety of individual circumstances such as....the
child's environment and experiences’
“ General Comment No 25 on the UNCRC highlights how digital technologies offer multiple opportunities for children to
improve their health and well-being’ and that ‘the digital environment promotes children’s rights to culture, leisure and
play, which is essential for their well-being and development’; See also OECD Campanion Document to the OECD
Recommendation on Children in the Digital Environment and the Council of Europe ‘Handbook for policymakers on the
rights of the child in the digital environment’.Design and Child Rights by Design publications by UK's Digital Futures Commission, for
example).
As UNICEF has noted, ‘digital play experiences help children de-stress, problem solve,
build confidence, resilience and a sense of belonging, provided that we properly
balance its opportunities against risk of harm’. Achieving this balance is critical.
Internet governance frameworks that require digital services to consider only potential
risks to children (as important as it is to mitigate) may create an entirely new category
of harm - sterile digital experiences that do not enhance child well-being but instead
stunt their development and growth.
The LEGO Group strongly recommends that the GDC, as a blueprint for an inclusive
and enabling digital future, explicitly recognises the importance of prioritising the
growth and development of children in online environments and highlights the need
for governments and industry to promote the well-being of children through the
governance and design of digital experiences online.
The GDC
presents a singular opportunity to ensure children are not forgotten in our
digital future. We believe that reflecting the needs of digital safety, child rights online
and the imperative of promoting child well-being in this blueprint is an investment in
children and families across the world. Thank you for the opportunity to comment and
share our experiences.
