1Preventing Technology-Facilitated Gender-Based Violence (TF GBV)
Responding to the 2030 Agenda and "Our Common Agenda" by proactively mitigating 
technology-facilitated gender-based violence by enhancing product design, data privacy and 
security, and legal frameworks to hold offenders accountable
Digital inclusion is not possible without digital safety. That is, benefiting from digital products is not 
possible without ensuring the safety and security of users. The prevalence of the internet and digital 
products has presented a tremendous opportunity to create, build, and regulate a more equal future for 
women and girls. Digital life provides vital spaces for women seeking expression and opportunity 
including access to basic education and services and yet it is simultaneously a vector for perpetrators 
and abusers (individuals, groups and collectives) targeting women and adolescent girls because of their 
gender. Technology-facilitated gender-based violence (TF GBV) comprises a spectrum of behaviors, 
including stalking, bullying, sexual harassment, defamation, hate speech, exploitation, and is associated 
with mis and disinformation and violent extremism,  which are perpetrated online or using technology. TF 
GBV not only reflects and further entrenches inequalities in the online world, it also increasingly interacts 
with and influences the offline world. Despite often being perceived as a less serious and less harmful 
form of GBV, TF GBV1 can have serious consequences on the health, life opportunities and right to 
expression of women and girls and increasingly manifests in and is a feature of offline gender-based 
violence. 
UNFPA has defined TF GBV as “an act of violence perpetrated by one or more individuals that is 
committed, assisted, aggravated and amplified in part or fully by the use of information and 
communication technologies or digital media, against a person on the basis of their gender.”2 At scale, 
this also means that women, girls, and LGBTQ communities can be targeted as groups. This inclusive 
definition requires us to defend and ensure the rights of women and girls in all spaces, physical and 
otherwise, including both digital and analog spaces where technology products are now commonplace. 
The repetitive nature of TF GBV means that most women experience multiple types of abuse. In short: 
the virtual is real . 
TF GBV is a systemic problem which restricts women and girls’ right to expression and ability to freely 
enjoy digital spaces and products. The prevalence of personally experiencing online violence against 
women globally is at a staggering 38 per cent, according to The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU)3--that’s 
nearly 2 out of every 5 women. EUI also reported that 85 per cent of women and girls on the internet 
have witnessed online violence being committed against other women.4 These numbers are even higher 
among young women and girls: a study conducted by Plan International in 31 countries found that 58% 
of young women and girls aged 15–25 years had experienced online harassment5--that’s nearly 3 out of 
1 UNFPA, 2021 “Technology-facilitated Gender-based Violence: Making All Spaces Safe”
2 UNFPA, 2021 “Technology-facilitated Gender-based Violence: Making All Spaces Safe”
3 Economist Intelligence Unit (2021). Measuring the prevalence of online violence against women. Available at: https://onlineviolencewomen.eiu.com/
4 Economist Intelligence Unit (2021). Measuring the prevalence of online violence against women. Available at: https://onlineviolencewomen.eiu.com/
5 Plan International (2020). Free to Be Online? Girls’ and young women’s experiences of online harassment
2every 5 young women. Further, women who experience intersecting forms of discrimination are at a 
greater risk of being harassed, a study showing that women of color using Twitter are 34 per cent more 
likely to be mentioned in an abusive tweet.6 Individual users and professionals alike who utilize official 
complaint pathways to report online violence social media companies may receive no response or slow 
responses, demonstrating a need for social media platforms to be better equipped to protect the rights 
of women and girl users. In short, the rights of women and girls to express themselves are not ensured 
in online spaces without additional effort.
TF GBV often takes place on a continuum in which actions that start in the digital space may lead to 
offline GBV perpetration and vice versa. For example, a survey in Malawi found that 54 per cent of 
women experienced physical abuse exacerbated by online violence and that 34 per cent were physically 
harmed or injured as a consequence of it.7 In other cases, sexualized forms of TF GBV, such as image-
based abuse, have led to honour-related violence against women.8 Women who have online presence for 
professional purposes or are activists and human rights defenders experience now TF GBV as a routine 
part of their lives. The Inter-Parliamentary Union found that 42 per cent of women in politics have been 
subjected to image-based abuse or defamation, and 44 per cent received online threats.9  Furthermore, 
in a study with 901 journalists across 125 countries, UNESCO found that 73 per cent of them had been 
subjected to online violence, and 20 per cent were attacked offline because of online threats and 
abuse.10
Legal and policy responses to TF GBV need further definition and embodiment of human rights, 
addressing both punitive criminalization as well as transformative justice elements. Despite TF GBV 
being the most systemic form of online violence, governments and organizations have been slow to 
develop appropriate solutions. This is complicated by TF GBV often being experienced as a pattern 
rather than a set of individual acts. Effectively this means that existing legal responses, which often 
treat each communication as a separate offense, fall short of addressing the longer-term accumulation 
of harm.11 Legal responses must be complemented with more holistic responses, including community-
based, government and technology company responses that ensure women users’ right to expression 
and safety, thereby enabling them to equitably experience joy and pleasure in digital spaces. Currently, 
we lack survivor-centred policies and decision-making to define technology formats, infrastructure and 
business models to support these goals. Instead, in some instances, TF GBV-related law and policy 
enacted to protect survivors has been co-opted  by perpetrators as weapons to persecute and prosecute 
feminist activists. Governments and technology companies have many opportunities to carefully take 
actions to build a more safe and inclusive technology-driven world that can work in tandem with law that 
is survivor-centred in content and in implementation.
TF GBV is not only online but is also facilitated through the use of digital products and devices. The 
rising use of and demand for interconnected devices or Internet of Things (IOT) devices offers benefits 
6 Amnesty International, “Troll Patrol findings”, December 2018, available at https://decoders.amnesty.org/projects/troll-patrol/findings.
7 Malanga, 2020. Tackling Genderbased Cyber Violence against Women and Girls in Malawi amidst the COVID-19 Pandemic. Available at: 
https://africaninternetrights.org/sites/default/files/Donald_ Flywell-1.pdf
8 GBV AoR Helpdesk (2021). Learning Series on Technology-Facilitated Gender-Based Violence. Learning Brief 1: Understanding technology-facilitated GBV.
9 Inter-Parliamentary Union (2016). Sexism, harassment and violence against women parliamentarians
10 J. Posetti, N. Shabbir, D. Maynard, K. Bontcheva and N. Aboulez (2021). The chilling: global trends in online violence against women journalists. UNESCO. 
Available at: https://en.unesco.org/news/unesco-releases-pioneering-discussion-paper-online-violence-against-women-journalists 
11 UNFPA, 2021 “Technology-facilitated Gender-based Violence: Making All Spaces Safe”
3that greatly improve quality of life and increase efficiency of certain tasks. However, there is little 
concerted decision-making and policymaking to address the amount of personal data collected and 
stored by these devices and how these devices and the data they generate may be coopted for 
malicious purposes. Smart chips are becoming common: smart TVs, wearables, voice assistants, 
computerized personal assistants, and even ordinary household devices like washing machines, 
toasters and refrigerators can now be connected to the internet. The setup and installation of these 
gadgets often require more than necessary personal data from users. IOT devices might collect and 
retain mass amounts of data and metadata on women and girls and share with a variety of parties, who 
may be able to extract data on where these women and girls are, what they are doing or saying, and 
perhaps even capture imagery and videos of them. Without inclusive threat modeling that considers IPV 
survivors and other oppressed groups in the design process, IoT devices can also be weaponised 
against women.12 Indeed, seemingly neutral design decisions can constrain, shape and facilitate 
coercive and controlling behaviors in an intimate partnership characterized by violence.  It is critical to 
ensure that the burgeoning IoT environment does not become a means through which gender-based 
violence, and intimate partner violence in particular, proliferates without regulation or accountability to 
users. 
Sensors that track movement, location and activities create approximate triangulations of who a person 
is, where they are and other vital data and statistics on them. These data are collected, shared, stored 
and sometimes sold to 3rd parties who could have little oversight and policies regarding the use and 
exploitation of personal data.13 Although the density of connected devices is predicted to rapidly 
increase, we must remember this takes place within a greater context of the Gender Digital Divide where 
even basic access to digital spaces and technology is gendered. The ability of this growing network of 
IoT devices to create new pathways for TF GBV is likely to increase: a report by Cisco suggests that 
Machine-to-Machine (M2M) devices and connections are growing faster than both the global population 
and internet users, enabling widescale adoption of IoT devices. For example, in North America in 2023, 
the average internet user now has 13 devices. However, the global average is 4 devices, with the Middle 
East and Africa having the lowest average at 1.5 devices per user.14 This discrepancy is an opportunity to 
proactively create and adopt survivor-centred IoT regulation and policy to ensure the rights of women 
and girls as IoT devices become ubiquitous.  
No matter the form it takes, TF GBV can have a devastating impact on women and girls by restricting 
their right to freedom of expression. As a result, we are deprived of their participation  as equal subjects 
in public life and civic spaces as well as their role as elected officials and public figures shaping 
democratic societies. Girls and young women surveyed by Plan International and subjected to frequent 
online violence reported that 19% started self-censoring and decreased posting about contentious 
topics and 12% stopped using social media in full.15 This pattern is repeated in women journalists: 30% 
of women journalists in a global survey responded to online violence by self-censoring their journalism 
on social media, while 20% reported withdrawing from all online interaction.16 UNESCO’s The Chilling 
12 J. Slupska and L Tanczer (2021) in Emerald international Handbook of Technology-facilitated Violence and Abuse, 663 - 688. 
13 Your Data is shared and sold. What’s being done about it. Knowledge at Wharton Available at https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/data-
shared-sold-whats-done/
14 Cisco Annual Internet Report (2018–2023) White Paper Available at https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/executive-perspectives/annual-internet-
report/index.html
15 Plan International (2020). Free to Be Online? Girls’ and young women’s experiences of online harassment
16 UNESCO (2021). The Chilling: Global trends in online violence against women journalists.
4report documents how TF GBV intimately-experienced by women journalists, which negatively influences 
their wellbeing and professional engagement, when taken in total, is an attack on democratic 
deliberation and media freedom. TF GBV silences women and girls, depriving the world of women’s 
voices, leadership and advocacy and indeed may lead to deplatforming. It damages relationships, leads 
to offline physical violence and causes tremendous mental health distress and even post-traumatic 
stress syndrome (PTSD). 
The Global Digital Compact may serve as a vehicle to (1) raise awareness of the multiple and increasing 
prevalence and forms of TF GBV17 and (2) mitigate the disproportionate risks to women of TF GBV which 
is enabled and amplified through non-inclusive and unsafe tech design. Achieving true gender equality, 
women’s empowerment and the realisation of women’s human rights requires harnessing the most 
positive outcomes of technology adoption and use while minimizing the potential harms that can be 
caused by widespread adoption and use of technology. 
Globally, we have made progress toward SDG5 on Gender Equality, yet as digital spaces and products 
become more widely adopted, this progress must be actively maintained or we risk backsliding in 
women and girls human rights and democratic principles. To achieve both goals of awareness raising 
and risk mitigation, attention on how technology products are actually used by people  in ways that 
disproportionately and negatively impact women is required, including in intimate partnerships, in 
communities, in online forums, by strangers, and more. Although there are many ways to address TF 
GBV, sustainable progress toward ending TF GBV must begin from how technology is used in practice 
while keeping societal impacts in mind. For example, if we take social media platforms as a technology, 
it is essential to understand women’s realities on these platforms and how their lived experiences, 
formed by how they and others use the technology, creates gendered impacts at micro, meso, and 
macro levels, ultimately changing the face of democratic processes in the 21st century: 
-Micro: TF GBV negatively impacts how individual citizens participate in, utilize, and benefit from 
the internet. For example, women are 27 times more likely to face harassment online than men18 
and 92% of women report that online violence negatively influences their wellbeing.19 
-Meso: TF GBV negatively affects how women, especially young women, use digital spaces to 
raise awareness and advocate for issues that are important to them.20 51 per cent of young 
women hesitate to engage in online debates after witnessing or directly experiencing online 
abuse21 and 38% of women journalists reported making themselves less visible in their workplace 
as a result of TF GBV.22 
-Macro: TF GBV negatively influences democratic leadership. Women public figures are targeted 
to a much greater extent than their male counterparts, undermining how they are perceived by 
the public through reputational damage campaigns. A survey on politically-active women in 
17 UNFPA, 2021 “Technology-facilitated Gender-based Violence: Making All Spaces Safe”
18 European Women’s Lobby, Her Net Her Rights – Mapping the state of online violence against women and girls in Europe (Brussels, 2017).
19 Economist Intelligence Unit (2021). Measuring the prevalence of online violence against women. Available at: https://onlineviolencewomen.eiu.com/
20 According to the Institut Public de Sondage d'Opinion Secteur, 41 per cent of French people have been at least targeted once by online violence, but this 
number raises to 85 per cent for French women under 35.
21 Dhanaraj Thakur and Asha Allen, “The impacts of online GBV and disinformation on women politicians in representative democracies”, prepared for the 
Expert Group Meeting of the sixty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status of Women, 2022.
22 UNESCO (2021). The Chilling: Global trends in online violence against women journalists.
5Kenya found that 20 per cent of those surveyed had paused their social media activity in 
response to online violence23 
In order to solidify the progress made on SDG5 on Gender Equality in the 21st century, TF GBV must be 
recognized and addressed for both existing technology products and proactively for those yet to come. 
By focusing on how technology is used, a TF GBV perspective firmly advances gender equity by 
addressing the causes of TF GBV and proactively works to transform gender norms and power relations 
through product design, incorporation of data privacy, and legal frameworks to protect the rights of all 
people in the digital age. These efforts must be nested within government and technology company 
actions to envision, build, deploy, and regulate new digital spaces and technology products.
We call on the Global Digital Compact to set the following principles for achieving and operationalizing  
gender-transformative digital solutions in the funding, conceptualization, design, adoption, use, and 
experienced outcomes of digital life for women, girls, and the LGBTQI+ community globally. 
-Ensure  women, girls and LGBTQI+ members are included throughout product development, 
deployment and maintenance processes, with particular attention to funding, ideation and 
design stages,  to proactively understand and mitigate end user realities. 
-Ensure that data privacy and security begins from the perspective of TF GBV survivors  and is 
achieved through robust end user controls, safety-by-design, and corporate and government 
encryption of data in transit (end to end encryption between devices) and at rest (while being 
stored).
-Ensure legal frameworks for accountability are constructed and implemented  to hold 
companies and offenders of TF GBV accountable for the experiences of women, girls, and the 
LGBTQI+ community.
Building on the course set by the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals, in particular 
SDGs 3, 5, and 9, the UN Secretary General’s “Our Common Agenda”, the Report of the Secretary-General 
“Roadmap for Digital Cooperation”, the guiding principles of the International Conference on Population 
and Development and the Global Partnership for Action on Online Gender-based Harassment and Abuse 
we note the following core principles and actions that should be taken to allow us to collectively achieve 
gender equity in digital technologies:
1.Safety by Design: Ensuring survivor-centered product financing, ideation, development and 
deployment
23 National Democratic Institute, Tweets That Chill Report, 2019

6The Global Digital Compact should work with Government and private technology companies to ensure 
solutions, products and platforms are designed with gender equity in mind, including design pedagogies 
that center (1) the voices of those who are directly impacted by design process outcomes, (2) the 
impact on communities over designer intentions and (3) everyday people as experts on end user 
experiences who collaborate with designers and developers.24 This mandates the participation of 
women and marginalized populations in the financing/funding of tech development and includes 
ideation, conceptualization, development, testing and scaling of products that have accessible safety 
features and complaint mechanisms in their solutions and platforms. Governments and businesses 
must ensure women’s active role in internal staffing across roles and levels of responsibility and in 
decision-making processes. 
Women and marginalized communities are not only a tremendous resource for ideation and 
conceptualization of tech products but are able to provide functional specifications to meet their needs 
as end users. Additionally, threat modeling25 and gender inclusive user testing are also critical processes 
for identifying design concerns in the end user interface . For example, location trackers are useful to find 
lost objects but have also been used to illegally stalk women. This viewpoint may be missed if the 
perspectives of women, of which 1 in 3 are survivors, are not central to ideation and design processes. 
Including women, girls and those disproportionately impacted by TF GBV in user testing is essential, and 
user testing questions must explicitly ask about gendered dimensions or potential applications and uses 
of tech products which may enable, assist, aggravate, and amplify gender-based violence. These 
aspects may not otherwise be captured during user testing and not be accounted for in design. 
Technological applications have unknown backend data collection practices that are hard to grasp for 
end users, this is exacerbated when creating products for use in low literacy and low numeracy 
environments. Relying on end users to identify data privacy concerns, and/or outline how technology 
may be hacked and used for nefarious purposes, is not a burden that should lie with them.26 
Governments and tech companies should include considerations of data privacy in the ideation phase, 
reimaging new business models and policies that do not bring tech products to digitally-low literate 
populations in exchange for  their data.
Recommendations to achieve this goal may include: 
-Development and application of technologies and digital platforms must be in partnership and 
with the participation of women in all their diversity as well as organizations, frontline providers 
and advocates, to ensure relevant and accessible safety features and complaint mechanisms.
-Safety must be considered from inception and directly incorporated at the design stage. For 
practical guidance and actionable recommendations, see the outcomes and recommendations 
report “Tech Policy Design Lab: Online Gender-Based Violence and Abuse”, which builds on the 
results from a series of workshops with relevant stakeholders, including survivors of TF GBV and 
technology companies.27 Australia’s eSafety Commissioner has also developed actionable 
recommendations and guidelines to operationalize Safety by Design across sectors. This 
24 Costanza-Chock, Sasha (2020). Design Justice: Community-Led Practices to Build the World We Need. MIT Press.
25 Threat modeling is the process of proactively identifying and addressing potential threats
26 Blackman, Reid. 2022. Ethical Machines: Your concise guide to totally unbiased, transparent, and respectful AI. Harvard Business Review Press.
27 World Wide Web Foundation. 2021. Tech Policy Design Lab: Online Gender-Based Violence and Abuse Outcomes & Recommendations. 
7includes a set of principles which outline measures that providers can use to safeguard users 
from online risks and harms; interactive assessment tools for businesses and technology 
companies; checklists, model clauses and other resources for investors; and a pilot programme 
to embed Safety by Design in university curricula across a range of disciplines.28 To complement 
these existing resources, UNFPA will shortly publish “Guidance on the Safe and Ethical Use of 
Technology for GBV and Harmful Practices Interventions.” This provides a tool for understanding 
design, monitoring and use of technology. Basing principles of this guidance into the structure of 
the Global Digital Compact will be fundamental to ensuring safety from the start. 
2.Privacy by Default and Design: Ensuring robust data privacy and security to proactively mitigate 
use of data for TF GBV
The Global Digital Compact should work with Governments and business and technology to advance, 
regulate, and standardize data collection practices, privacy, and security. Data collected and stored can 
be weaponised to commit and amplify TF GBV including intimate partner violence, cyberstalking, sharing 
of intimate images without consent, doxxing and impersonation. While data is highly valuable and 
essential to the business model of companies, collection of personal data should be only for certain 
cases when consent has been provided and there is a primary functional user driven reason. The 
economic value of data incentivises technology companies to collect data, often unknown or poorly 
understood by end users, resulting in a loss of data privacy, data security, and a sense of control over 
how one’s information is being used by others. Businesses should be incentivized to re-imagine digital 
futures with business models, design decisions and policies that serve women and girl users for 
equitable experiences of technology. 
The Global Digital Compact should advocate for technology to embed privacy into the underlying 
specification or architecture of the IOT device and data gathering, through Privacy by Default and by 
Design approaches. Women and girls and users in general should have products where privacy is the 
default setting, or have the right to opt out of their data being collected or at the very least be able to 
choose to store data collected locally on the device itself, such that the company does not store nor 
transmit such data. Personal and personal-identifying information should be discouraged especially 
when signing up on platforms to use IOT devices. Users can be given the option to opt in or consent to 
have their data collected if needed for certain aspects of the functionality. 
Data collection and data use for women-centered digital solutions need to adhere to ten data principles. 
These principles should not be limited to personal data and must be applied to all data that is collected 
on women and girls. The data principles, which complement safety by design29 approaches, include: 
purpose limitation, data minimization, proper use of data, fairness and ownership, informed consent and 
transparency, accuracy and data quality, security: integrity, confidentiality and availability, accountability, 
and unconditional service.30
28 eSafety Commissioner. 2022. Safety by Design. Available at: https://www.esafety.gov.au/industry/safety-by-design 
29 A practice of proactively embedding safety and risk mitigation strategies into the design and development of products and services. The focus is on 
minimizing risk by anticipating, detecting and eliminating harm before it occurs rather than safeguarding after an issue arises. Source: eSafety 
Commissioner, https://www.esafety.gov.au/industry/safety-by-design 
30 UNFPA, “Guidance on use of technology to address gender-based violence and harmful practices,” forthcoming.
8While the interaction of women and girls with technology will and should continue to increase, data 
protection and privacy should be a priority in ensuring women and girls are not further exposed to 
harmful actors who mine personal data for malicious actions. Anchoring data collection in safe and 
ethical principles as well as human rights-based approaches is central to ensure that efforts are made 
to address the gap on gender-equity in digital solutions and women-centric design solutions.
Recommendations to achieve this goal may include: 
-Strengthen systems to support data security, including confidential information collected and 
managed by State actors and data collected through location-based applications and platforms.
-International agreements and a common right-based legislative framework to address cross-
border TF GBV. 
-Reduce privacy risks to women and girls by disconnecting the data subject from the data 
collected. Methods such as differential privacy, synthetic data or homomorphic encryption, could 
aid as part of a solution to ensure data collected cannot be traced back to the particular user.
3.Effective Regulation: Implementation of law and policy to enforce accountability 
The Global Digital Compact should advise Governments to develop law and policies to address TF GBV 
which includes the recognition and integration of TF GBV across civil, criminal laws, regulations and 
policies. This regulatory framework must be designed, implemented and enforced through consultative 
mechanisms and serve to both regulate private technology companies and hold offenders to account.  
Legal frameworks must adequately protect all women’s human rights online, including the right to life 
free from violence, freedom of expression, access to information and the right to privacy and data 
protection.
Law and policy must be developed through consultative processes with women’s groups and 
organizations as well as business and technology companies to ensure that it is effective, mitigated 
unintended consequences and will not do harm. The specific harms caused by TF GBV must have 
specific regulatory responses and accountability mechanisms. Further, regulation must comprise both 
self-regulation, industry standards as well as laws to ensure that survivor-centered approaches can be 
enforced. Moreover, do no harm approaches to capture unintended consequences, including the 
weaponising of laws against women’s voices and ensuring that the right to freedom of expression is not 
abused, is critical. 
Recommendations to achieve this goal may include: 
-Dedicated resources to develop, implement and enforce human rights-centred law, policies, 
systems and processes which are designed to address TF GBV specifically.  In addition, any 
regulatory framework developed to address TF GBV must be survivor-centred, trauma informed 
and intersectional. 
-Increased resources to ensure capacitated staff across Government, CSOs and technology to 
ensure confidential data security and platform safety, including through law enforcement 
mechanisms. 
-Promote independent regulators to enforce, manage and support business and tech to ensure 
expedient, practical and accessible remedies (including non-judicial support) as well as ensuring 
due process mechanisms for survivors of TF GBV.
9-Require transparency from business and tech relating to design processes and content 
moderation ( in the case of platforms) as well as data security and privacy. 
-Mandate and enforce laws and regulations that require and incentivize private technology 
companies to proactively develop, maintain and implement policies to respond to and mitigate 
the occurrence of TF GBV through a range of processes including: (1) visible, easily accessible, 
plain-language complaint and abuse reporting mechanisms of harmful content, including in end 
user local languages, (2) ensuring effective internal triaging and escalation of complaints; (3) 
effective internal protocols for connecting with law enforcement and support services and 
hotlines for illegal content; (4) assigning responsibilities to internal teams for implementing user 
safety policies; (5) improving user consent through social contracts between users, services and 
third parties at the time of registration;31 (6) require training of all staff to understand their role in 
monitoring and removal of harmful content relating to TF GBV; and (7) provision of independent 
audits and publish comprehensive annual transparency reports, including gender-disaggregated 
data, relating to implementation of the policies.
-Efforts to eradicate TF GBV through law and policy must not use gendered hate speech and 
disinformation as a pretext to restrict freedom of expression beyond what is permitted under 
international law. This requires a gender-sensitive interpretation of freedom of expression and 
opinion. 
-Consider the provision of incentives to private technology companies to encourage compliance 
with and active promotion of the protection of women and girls using their services.
This is a call for action: In order to ensure respect, protection and promotion of women’s human rights 
in the digital age, it is essential to address the way in which the design, adoption and proliferation of 
technologies intersect with existing gender inequalities. Gender equality and women’s human rights will 
require integrated digital safety and security to protect privacy and prevent technology-facilitated 
gender-based violence. 
31 eSafety’s Safety by Design Assessment Tool. n.d. for items 2-5.  