 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
International Environ ment House 2  
Chemin de Balexert 7 -9  
POB 228, 1211 Geneva 19  
Switzerland  
Tel.: +41(0)22 791 80 50  
E-mail: south@southcentre.int   
Website: www.southcentre.int   
 
 
Submission to the Global Digital Compact  
Apply Human Rights Online  
 
South Centre  
 
Geneva, April 2023  
 
 
The South Centre is the intergovernmental organization of developing countries that 
provides them with support to combine their efforts and expertise to promote their 
common interests in the international arena. The South Centre was established by an 
Intergovernmental Agre ement which came into force on 31 July 1995. Its 
headquarters are in Geneva, Switzerland and is currently comprised of 55 developing 
countries from all regions of the developing world.  
The South Centre ’s Board approved  in September 2022 its Programme of Work 2023 -
2025  where  the policy dimensions of digital transformation are highlighted  as one of 
the priority area s for developing countries, including the need to harness digital 
technologies in education, health and the production of goods and services, support 
the development of a domestic digital industry, improve their digital infrastructure, 
advance digital equit y and inclusion, effectively tax the digital companies  and 
contribute to shaping the digital governance architecture to advance the S ustainable 
Development Goals (SDG s). 
Following the  call made in the  Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy -
Fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (A/RES/75/1)  for improved digital cooperation, 
the U nited Nations (UN)  Secretary General ’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation and his 
report ‘Our Common Futur e’, the South Centre submit s the following written 
contribution  to the UN Secretary General  ahead to the Summit of the Future  with the 
objective of providing support to developing countries in th e intergovernmental 
process  concerning the digital transformation .  
Background  
The Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy -Fifth Anniversary of the 
United Nations , adopted by the General Assembly , which  made a call to improve the 
digital cooperation among all countries and regions of the world ,  recognised the need 
to achieve a digital future that , inter alia,  allows for the full potential of beneficial 
 
2 
 technology usage  while addressing digital trust and security , with the objective of 
accelerat ing the realization of the 2030 Agenda .  
Achieving digital transformation in the current world scenario requires not only to 
consider  this issue from a technical perspective. As evidenced by the COVID -19 
pandemic, growing inequalities in human development  have hit the most vulnerable 
peopl e and  highlighted the need to promote s ocial sustainability and inclusion as a 
cornerston e for achieving the transformation of society . This requires , among other 
actions,  identifying innovative solutions for tackling the unique challenges faced by 
developing and least developed countries on the path to digital transformation, 
including by s eeking the best means for the improvement of human conditions that 
allow a broader understanding of development for the promotion, protection, and 
fulfilment of a ll human rights .  
The need for  enhancing  digital literacy  for promoting justice, equity and  development 
for all  require s States to fulfil their duty to cooperate internationally . Similarly, such 
cooperation will be needed to guarantee the right s to privacy  and not to be profiled , 
to personal safety and security , to connecti vity and to digital self -determination . In 
line with these objective s, the South Centre submit s the following inputs in relation to 
the recognition and implementation of human rights online . 
1. Digital rights at the core  
It would be impossible to achieve the objectives set out  in any instrument dealing with 
the issue of digital transformation without looking at its linkages with the obligation 
to guarantee the full implementation and protectio n of human rights  by States and 
other stakeholders , including businesses . Those rights are not only limited to civil and 
political rights, including the right to freedom of expression, privacy and personal 
security, but also include other set of rights whose realization requires access to 
electrical power , electronic devices, communications networks , online services  as well 
as digital literacy.  
Digital transformation goes beyond interpreting existing human rights as an extension 
to the internet age ; it demands a broader and more dif ferentiated approach . On the 
one side, peoples and countries differ in their level s of development,  access to 
technology, values  and culture . Thus, the existing digital divide is not  explained only 
by the lack of access to technology and information , but it has deeper roots involving 
failures and gaps in the realization of fundamental rights, such as the right to education  
and culture , and the right to enjoy scientific progress . On the other, the digital 
environment creates unprecedented situations and risks that require the definition of 
a new sub -set of human rights . 
In line with this reality, the Global Digital Compact should recognise that human rights 
are at the core of the digital transformation, which not only implies expanding the 
interpretation of existing human rights to the digital transformation, but identifying  
the gaps in human rights law that need to be addressed to guarantee that the digital 
 
3 
 transformation benefits the world populatio n without discrimination on the basis of 
income, gender , race  and ethnicity , disability, access to education or age.  
1.1 Policy recommendations  
- Universal and equal access to digital tools and communications networks: the 
recognition of the digital divide as one of the major challenges to achieving 
digital transformation for all  requires ensuring universal and equal access to 
digital to ols and  online networks to all, including by promoting universal access 
for persons with disabilities.  
- Privacy and data  self-determination : personal  data and  information should not  
be use d for the financial gain  of digital service  providers ;  an international 
framework needs to be developed ensuring not only the rights to privacy  and 
not to be profiled,  but the rights to personal safety and security , to connectivity 
and digital self-determination . 
- Protection of people  and communities facing barriers : Ensuring the protection 
of children, women, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples, and other 
people facing barriers is necessary to sustain and guarantee human rights in the 
digital transformation.  Securing participation  through  safe and universal  access 
to digital tools and networks of these communities are just some of the 
fundamental aspects of th ese principles, whose implementation also requires 
the commitment of States to developed cooperation mechanisms for  sharing 
technologies  and attain ing digital literacy .  
- Fighting against poverty and inequality:  Social sustainability and inclusion 
should become a critical pillar for digital transformation. This requires seeking 
the best means for the improvement of human conditions for a just digital 
transformation - for example by guaranteeing the attainment of economic, 
social and cultural rights, and the right to development. Digital transformation 
as a tool for achiev ing social inclus ion, require s the full implementation of all 
human rights so as to ensure  an effective, accountable and inclusive  process  of 
digitalization .  
2. Digital transformation and climate action  
The potential of digital transformation for climate action is vast. The possibility of using 
data  to analyse the effects of climate change in specific geographical zones, or in 
economic sectors, as well as the exchange of information among different regions of 
the world through improved connectivity are complementary means to achieve higher 
technical performance in climate action. Nonetheless, digital transformation  demands 
large amounts of energy, and must also be efficie nt to  contribute to a sustainable 
development . There is therefore a need to improve  the access to clean and affordable 
energy  in developing count ries while having in view the socio -economic needs and 
development strategies of each society .  
 
4 
 Likewise, taking track of digital innovation should consider the need for making 
technology more sustainable in the long term . While digital software innovation can 
strengthen climate action  by promoting more efficient use of energy, the continuous 
innovation of hardware and production of short -life devises promote high -intensive 
extraction of rare m inerals  and increa ses e-waste , which in turn increases the pressure 
on the environment.   
2.1 Policy recommendations  
- Energy transition is necessary for inclusive digital transformation : 
Guaranteeing access to affordable and renewable energy is necessary to 
achieve inclusive digital transformation. This objective requires to consider the 
specific challenges faced by developing countries, including the ir social and 
economic needs ; actions to achieve a transition to clean and renewable sources  
should be consistent with the principles of equity and common but 
differentiated responsibilities included in the UNFCCC .  
- Finance and international cooperation:  Constraints in f inance for 
development, including to address climate c hange,  is one of the most relevant 
issues for developing countries today. It needs careful attention to avoid that 
Investment directed towards digital transformation has the perverse effect of 
increasing the indebtedness of those countries.  
- Reducin g planned obsolescence : It is crucial to reduce planned obsolescence 
of technology, in particular by promoting long -life technology and facilities to 
repair digital devices. In the short term , limiting  planned obsolescence could 
make access to technology more affordable , while promoting sustainable 
consumption. In the long term, increasing the use of digital hardware could 
reduce the pressure on extraction of rare minerals, and e -waste.    
3. Digital transformation  and labour rights   
The continuing impacts that the COVID -19 pandemic has had on economic, social and 
cultural rights have highlighted the non -monetary dimensions of the crisis , in 
particular with respect to lost learning of young students, strained  health care 
systems, reduc ed household incomes, constrained structures for income support and 
lack of employment security.   
The path towards digital transformation will impact the labour market , particularly in 
those sectors  where  digital technologies and equipment can replace human labour , or 
repetitive task can be automated. Notab ly, digital innovation has not produced the 
expected spill overs in productivity and decent work  in developed and developing 
countries alike;  on the contrary the digital divide has increased the inequality and 
development gap between the developed and developing world , including by 
undermining legal labour standards.  
While the labour displacement effect linked to digital technologies has been reflected 
in the production of goods, the service s sector is only now identifying the benefits and 
 
5 
 setbacks that newer technologies, including artificial intelligence and mach ine-
learning technologies , could bring to the formal labour market.  In addition, the 
platform economy based on digitalisation, has led to the deterioration of the 
employment situation of individuals occupied in some sector s, with jobs  that become 
precarious due to increased flexibility  and reduction of the social benefits associated 
to the formal labour market.  
Finally, the energy transition required to achieve the objectives set out by the climate 
agenda in the context of digital transformation should minimize the challenges that 
workers might face, while maximizing its benefits towards achieving a just transition  
that guarantees the creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with 
nationally defined development priorities, and the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities included  in the Climate 
Change discussion.  
3.1 Policy recommendations  
- Digital literacy and upskilling initiatives for digital transformation:  digital 
literacy  is essential for achieving inclusive digital transformation. Guaranteeing 
basic education is the first step to achieve this objective, but continuous 
training and capacity building  is necessary to guarantee higher quality jobs in 
the medium to long term. Digital transformation  also requires the planning and 
implementation of upskilling strategies for reducing the effects of digital 
transformation on displaced workers .  
- Respect of local conditions and nationally defined development priorities:  
labour policies must consider local conditions and approaches to achieve the 
nationally defined development priorities . Such policies must respect human 
and labour  rights, in particular social protection schemes that guarantee 
resilience in the face of digital transformation.   
- Overcoming the digital divide: there is a need to address the c urrent digital 
inequalities, including those  related to access to digital tech nologies and the 
lack of skills to use them and reap the potential benefits derived from their use. 
Broader attention should be given to address digital inequalities, by enhancing 
public participation in decision -making ; including by  groups facing identified 
challenges , can play an important role towards a fair and inclusive  digital 
transformation.  
4. The need for strengthen ed multilateralism  and international cooperation  
The discussion on  the Global Digital Compact should strengthen multilateralism 
through an intergovernmental process that protects the voices of developing and le ast 
developed countries, which are the ones facing major hurdles originating from the 
digital divide. The discussion on the Global Digital Compact should avoid becoming a 
platform for promoting  the interests of major tech companies and firms ; it should  
rather enhance the opportunity to participate by civil society and communities that 
are facing the challenges of digital transformation. The process should guarantee  a 
 
6 
 State-led open discussion while identifying any conflict of interest that could 
undermine the development of an outcome guided by the global public  interest .  
Public and private partnerships can be in some instances a useful tool to support an 
inclusive digital transformation , but they are not a panacea nor an instrument that can 
always respo nd to the public needs . Strengthening public participation and oversight 
of public -private partnerships, guided by strong principles of transparency and the 
protection and respect for human rights, is necessary to support the transfer of 
technology, skills and knowledge ne eded to promote an inclusive digital 
transformation . 
4.1 Policy recommendations  
- Avoiding and limiting c onflict of inter est: The Summit for the Future should 
strengthen the role of states as owners of the process. A clear policy to appeal 
and challenge the participation of certain stakeholders that have a conflict of 
interest in decision -making is necessary. Following the example of other 
multilateral and state lead processes, such as the WHO Guidelines on the 
protection of public  health policies with respect to tobacco control from 
commercial and other vested interests could be useful . 
-  
- Promoting business accountability in digital transformation:  The adoption of 
a legally binding instrument on business and human rights -currently under 
negotiation in the Human Rights Council - can support the objectives  to be set 
out by the Global Digital Compact  by strengthening access to information for 
victims of human rights violations and harmonization of rules for mutual judicial 
cooperation in cases involving  businesses operations .  