Contribution to the Global Digital Compact  
  
Premise  
The Internet and digital technologies play a fundamental role in social, economic and cultural 
development and the definition of the principles of the Global Digital Compact will have a 
significant impact on their evolution in all countries of the world, including Italy.  
IGF Italia  community has decided to join the many voices that intend to participate in this 
process. In fact, we believe that the debate on the GDC is an opportunity for the IGF multi -
stakeholder community and for all those who want to contribute to building a better, safer 
and fairer digital future for all, which leaves no one behind.  
We thank the Secretary -General of the United Nations for initiating this inclusive and m ulti-
stakeholder debate, open to all.  
This document takes into consideration the contributions collected during the public 
consultation on the Global Digital Compact by IGF Italia and the results of the  debate  held 
during IGF Italia 2022 in Ancona1. 
The contributions to the GDC consultation were edited and consolidated by: Concettina 
Cassa (AgID, vice -president of Italy  IGF), Debora Barletta (Youth IGF Italy), Riccardo Nanni 
(Youth IGF Italy), Andrea Beccalli (founding member of Italy IGF).  
 
 
  
 
1 Some considerations in cluded in the document could be attributed to the authors.  
 
 
1)   Connectivity  
Connecting all people to the Internet, including schools and safeguarding human rights 
online  
Principles 
· Safeguarding  the development of the Internet as a unique, free, global, open, 
interoperable, secure, resilient asset accessible to all , is an essential tool for economic 
growth and social well -being and for the achievement of the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).  
· Guaranteeing the development of network infrastructures in every part of the national 
territory.  
· Ensuring the application and respect of human rights online as well as offline with 
particular attention to the defense of the rights of children and marginalized groups  
· Maintaining access to the Internet for all as a fundamental right of all.   
· Promoting the digital inclusion of the population at all levels with particular attention to 
youth, women and the elderly and to the most fragile ca tegories.  
· Supporting business models that guarantee Internet access at a fair price and accessible 
to all.  
· Ensuring that schools, universities and cultural centers are equipped with quality Internet access, accessible to students and teachers.  
· Requesting that the digital divide  is a priority for Governments and stakeholders 
involved in the management and evolution of the Internet. Support the promotion of 
any initiative useful for the development of digital skills in every segment of the 
populat ion without which it is not possible to promote digital inclusion.  
Key commitments:  
1. Member States need to promote the necessary investments, also through public -
private partnerships, for the diffusion of ultra -broadband, the strengthening of the 
transport network and of the I nterchange Points (Internet Exchange Points) and any 
useful action to guarantee safe, reliable, resilient connections as well as the quality of 
the network services that should be homogeneous across the territories. In support of 
this initiative, it should also be considered to:  
· require a balanced distribution of investments between governm ents, ISPs and 
OTTs.  
· annually measure the progress and impact of the investments supported.  
2. It is suggested that Member S tates pay more attention to Internet Governance  priority 
issues. On this aspect it could be useful to activate a national Multistakehokder Center 
of Expertise on the Internet with a global and non- fragmented knowledge of the 
Internet Governance  public policies issues  in their various dimensions: network 
infrastructures, protocols, DNS, social platforms, security, privacy, etc.  Those 
dimensions should be measured and monitored on a regular basis to ensure an 
informed understanding of policy makers of the Internet Governance priority iss ues. 
In support of this initiative, it should also be foreseen:  
· The definition of globally valid indicators to measure progress on Internet  
development at national and regional level. The Unesco Internet Universality 
indicators could be used as reference ( ROAM).  
3. Initiate a dialogue between Governments, Telecom Operators, OTT and other interested 
stakeholders in order to:  
· Improve meaningful connectivity at national and global level.  
· Cover the mountainous and remote areas, completing the distribution of the fiber 
coverage.  
· Strengthen the community networks in territories where there is less diffusion of 
the broadband.  
· Set up free Wi -Fi access zones . 
· Launch an informational campaign aimed at Citizens  on the possibilities that 
Internet access can provide in terms of services and opportunities.  
4. It is suggested to launch an informational campaign aimed at  Citizens  on the 
possibilities that Internet access can provide in terms of services and opportunitie s. 
5. Include digital training in school curricula and to equip all schools with the appropriate 
tools and skills necessary to teach the use of the Internet and digital technologies.  
6. Encourage the redistribution and reuse of devices in the  Public Administrati ons so as 
to maximize the impact and lifespan of the devices for some entities but still usable 
for others, which could be completely lacking them.  
7. Activate any useful initiative, also of a legislative nature, so that access to the Internet 
is considered a fundamental right of the citizens.  
8. Ensure the  respect for Human Rights online as well as offline.  In support of this 
initiative,  we should also:  
· Emphasize that accessing the Internet and defending human rights online must be a commitment of any democratic government.  
· Pay particular attention to the safeguarding of minors, elderly and gender 
diversity.  
· Uphold and promote the principles included in the European Declaration on 
Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade and  those included in the 
Internet Bill of Rights approved in Italy by the Parliamentary Commission on July 
28 2015.  
· Promote collaborations between Member S tates to outline a set of universal 
digital rights taking inspiration from the regulatory initiatives activated by the 
European Union (Digital Markets Act, Digital Services Act, Artificial Intelligence Act, 
Cybersecurity Act, GDPR).  
9. It is suggested  to prom ote the development of digital skills and digital literacy 
initiatives through Schools and Universities and in collaboration with the interested 
stakeholders (social platforms, private companies, etc.), favoring a full awareness of 
the use of the Internet and technologies and measuring the development of digital 
skills.  
2) Avoid Internet fragmentation  
Support the value of the Internet as an interconnection of networks, unique, free, global, 
open, secure, interoperable and accessible to all . 
Support the multi -stakeholder governance model as a model that helps counter the 
fragmentation of the Internet.  
 Key commitments:  
In light of these points, it is deemed necessary to:  
1. Support the adoption of open and interoperable standards.  
2. Advocate for Governments to take regulatory measures that do not put the logical infrastructure of the Internet at risk.  
3. Promote a dialogue with the technical sector and with civil society to understand which people or groups of people are most negatively affected by t he fragmentation 
of the Internet and develop possible solutions based on that.  
4. Avoid raining down solutions that do not reflect the needs of the people/communities affected.  
3) Data protection 
Principles 
· Identifying a set of principles that highlight the centrality and importance that data 
have in the economic, social and political life and define global rules to protect 
data, to regulate the data collection, data storage, use of data and that ensure a trust and safe trans -national transfer o f data.  
· Define a global data governance strategy that guarantees data privacy and protection but also the free flow of data as an economic resource.  
· Promoting education and the " data cultur e" in a multidisciplinary and 
multistakeholder context.  
· Enhancing the public information assets and the dissemination of Open Data.  
  
 
Key commitments:  
In light of these points, it is deemed necessary to:  
1. Draw the attention of Governments to data protection and suggest them to adopt a 
data governance strategy based on the respect and defense of Human Rights . 
2. Promote the definition of a global regulatory framework that takes into account the European Data Pr otection Regulations, the GDPR and the EU DATA Act, and promote 
the adoption of privacy by design models.  
3. The global regulatory framework should ensure a trust ed and safe trans -national 
transfer of data and the application of adequate security and privacy  measures in 
cloud infrastructures. In support of this initiative, it should also be considered to:  
· Communicate data protection rules and practices in simple and usable language even for less experienced users.  
4. Establish principles for the development of quality and interoperable data such as: a)  
the adoption and development of common and global standards  by the Governments 
and Private Companies, b) the promotion of Open Data  by the Governments, c) the 
Data reuse, d) Data transparency, e) Data Accountability, f) Data Portability.  
5. Ensure greater protection of the identity of minors. In support of this initiative, it should also be considered to:  
· Strengthen the data protection of minors considering that, despite the existence 
of formal restrictions, they often use digital products and platforms designed for 
adults and it is difficult to prevent it.  
5. Insert more restrictions and ensure that authorization to use facial r ecognition is 
requested before entering places where this tool is used.  
7. Foster public regulation in order to strengthen digital users' trust in areas such as data 
protection. Avoid measures (also resulting from non -regulation) that restrict the 
platform ma rket to oligopolies of private giants headquartered in only one or two 
countries.  
8. Empower and make as many users as possible aware of the risks and potential of the 
Internet and its applic ations . Currently, this problem is completely ignored especially 
in relation to the most fragile groups (very young people up to 18 years of age in 
particular).  
  
 4) Security and misleading content 
Principles 
· Outline a set of principles that underpin the development of one Trusted Internet . 
· Advocate for the development of the Internet as a single, global, non -fragmented, 
secure and inclusive network of networks and support " The core principles of the 
Internet ”. 
· Promote and support a common security strategy among member states.  
· Promote and support a plan to combat disinformation and propaganda among 
member states.  
 Key commitments:  
In light of these points, it is deemed necessary to:  
1. Support training initiatives and an awareness campaign on how to defend people from 
cyberattacks.  
2. Support the necessary investments to ensure the security of Internet infrastructures and processes. Promote the development of "security by design" models and 
procedures in SMEs  and public administration.  
3. Promote and support a common regulation of Artificial Intelligence based on the defense of human rights and on the concept of “Digital Humanism ” where the role of 
AI is to help humans expand their capabilities. In support of this initiative, it should also be considered to:  
· support the centrality of the human being and respect of human rights  in the 
development of the Internet and digital technol ogies . 
· support and promote the transparency and accountability of AI algorithms and ensure a governance model that protects human rights.  
 
5) Other  
In addition to the topics and points listed above, we believe it is essential to highlight the following add itional indications:  
· We think it is important to keep an open, inclusive, transparent and multi stakeholder 
approach throughout all steps of the Global Digital Compact, not only during the current 
consultations but also in the following negotiations.  
·  We believe that the Global Digital Compact should not only recommend guiding 
principles for the Internet of the future, but should identify clear and concrete actions to achieve its objectives, including metrics to measure progress towards a chieving these 
goals.  
· We want to emphasize the importance of the IGF as a global multistakeholder platform facilitating the discussion of public policy issues pertaining to the Internet, the important 
contribution the IGF could give to the GDC processes an d the need to sustain the renewal 
of the IGF mandate in the WSIS +20 review process. We also support the strengthening of the IGF as suggested in the " Roadmap for Digital Cooperation" and in " Our Co mmon 
Report".  
· We suggest the involvement of the IGF in the follow up processes of the GDC and in the 
drafting of the GDC principles  that should take into account the IGF results/messages.  We 
also suggest using the IGF as a central space for taking stock and assessing implementation 
of the Compact’s  principles and commitments going forward . 
· We suggest increasing collaboration between the GDC processes and other similar 
initiatives such as the Declaration on the Future of the Internet and the European 
Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles, whic h focus on the same issues  included in 
the Global Digital Compact.  
· We suggest using knowledge and expertise  developed by the NRIs, Dynamic Coalitions 
and other intersessional IGF activities and working groups (PNEs and BPFs) in the GDC 
processes.  
· We suggest leveraging  IGF's National and Regional initiatives to activate collaborations 
and concrete initiatives to assess and implement the principles of the GDC.  
· We think that Internet Governance issues and  that GDC principl es should  be highlighted  
in the politi cal agendas at the national, regional and international levels.  
· We suggest activating open channel s for listening to C itizens on concrete actions to be 
taken to improve Internet regulatory policies.  
Finally, recognizing the excellent work done by the IGF Secretariat , we strongly suggest that 
this very small structure should be strengthened by allocating the necessary funds and human resources. This would allow for a more appropriate expression of the IGF's potential and for 
a better dissemination, thro ugh support of the activities of the MAG and of the Leadership 
Panel, of the IGF messages and outputs.   
 
Thanks  
Thanks to Andrea Sammarco, D eputy General Secretary of Unioncamere, and his team, for 
having promoted the public consultation o f the Global Digital Compact in Italy , among SMEs.  
 
 