 
  
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUBMISSION TO THE GLOBAL DIGITAL 
COMPACT (APRIL 2023)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
30.04 .2023  
 
 
International Information Security School , 
Institute of Contemporary International Studies,  
the Diplomatic Academy of the Russian Foreign Affairs Ministry  
E-mail: info@mibschool.ru   
  
INTERNATIONAL 
INFORMATION  
 SECURITY  
SCHOOL  
 
 
  
2 
 
DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION  
 
The International Information Security School (IISS) is a youth 
scientific and analytical platform created on the basis of the Institute 
of Contemporary International Studies of the Diplomatic Academy of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Feder ation in 
cooperation with the Council of Young Scientists of the Diplomatic 
Academy of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation 
for an inclusive discussion and exchange of views, positions and 
assessments, development of strategies for a c omprehensive 
solution to problems of international information security, formation 
of Track II - Youth Diplomacy on Information Security issues by 
Russian and foreign young scientists, international experts and 
practitioners, Russian and international acad emic and research 
institutes.  
IISS won in the nomination "For Contribution to international 
cooperation in the field of IT" within the framework of the II All -
Russian Youth Forum on Internet Governance, held under the 
auspices of the United Nations. The IISS Head is the Youth 
Ambassador of the United Nations Forum on Internet Governance.  
The IISS has been accredited within the framework of the UN 
Open -ended Working Group on security of and in the use of 
information and communications technologies since Ju ly 2022.  
 
KEY ACTIONS  
 
The main purpose of the IISS is to create Track II -Youth 
Diplomacy in relation to ICT security issues. In order to achieve this 
goal, the IISS implements the following activities:  
 participation in activities of the OEWG, IGF and other global 
initiatives re lated to the Internet and information security;  
 interacting with state and non -state institutions, IT companies, 
scientific and technical community on international information 
security;  
 
  
3 
 implementation of a discussion platform with the participation 
of lea ding theorists and practitioners on international information 
security issues;  
 creation of working groups with the participation of experts of 
different profiles;  
 conducting lectures, scientific seminars, teleconferences with 
the participation of leading f oreign specialists aimed at research of 
topical issues of international information security.  
 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Threats to information security are becoming increasingly 
important for international security and stability. There are many 
initiatives in this area, one of them is the Global Digital Compact 
(GDC).  
It is stated  that the GDC is an opportunity for civil society to 
contribute to the establishment of agreed principles of digital 
governance that support human rights, social justice and sustainable 
development and that can form the basis of a long –term framework 
for accountable and inclusive Internet governance.  
The GDC has several positive aspects. For example, some 
groups o f States  emphasize  the need for a multi -lateral approach and 
the sovereignty of States over national network segments. Such a 
constructive approach indicates the possibility that the interests of 
the entire global information society will be taken into acc ount as 
part of the work on the GDC.  
In this regard, it seems appropriate to work out a common 
strategy for the implementation of such initiatives as the regulation 
of global digital platforms, the protection of users' rights on the 
Internet, the differen tiation of national legislation and internal rules 
of network services. It may also be useful to introduce a provision in 
the GDC on the need to provide users with the opportunity to receive 
information in their national language, in other words, the 
devel opment of a national segment of the Internet and 
multilingualism.  
 
  
4 
In addition, as part of the development of the GDC, there are 
proposals to abandon the principle of Eurocentrism in rule -making. 
These proposals are made by representatives of the European 
сommunity. "Waiting for the adoption of standards in the EU puts 
Switzerland at a disadvantage", - notes  the Swiss Internet 
Governance Forum. "When it comes to data protection, European 
norms should not be assumed as "superior" or "gold standard", - 
outlines  the Youth IGF Germany. This creates a window of 
opportunity to promote alternative approaches and norms that take 
into account the interests of the global information community.  
 
THE GENERAL STANDPOINT  
 
To maintain international peace and security, it is necessary to 
specify the main directions of interaction, which, based on the 
principle of sovereign equality of all States, contribute to maintaining 
the foundations of international law and ensuring international 
security, namely:  
 The use of the Internet for military purposes should not be 
tolerated. The Internet should be demilitarized . Any action aimed at 
using the Internet for military purposes should be recognised as 
illegal. This will build confidence at the global, regional, multilate ral 
and bilateral levels and will serve as the foundation for international 
peace, security and stability.  
 Recognition of the information space within the State as its 
sovereign part and the area of responsibility of this State. The 
internal information sp ace of the State should stay inviolable and 
interference with it should be equated with interference with the 
physical space of the State.  
 Inviolability of the right of all States and their inhabitants to 
access the global Internet.  
 The right of access sho uld not be used as leverage or coercion;  
this is contrary to the fundamental provisions of the UN Charter.  
 Development of fundamental principles and norms of 
international law governing the activities of States and other actors 
 
  
5 
in the global information sp ace, in particular, the development of 
norms for regulating information and psychological influence and the 
introduction of liability for the deliberate dissemination of knowingly 
false information, political and social manipulation, fake news and 
other me thods of disinformation.  
 The Internet should serve the interests of world peace and any 
disputes should be resolved on the basis of a peaceful settlement 
method.  
 Calls for the violation of international norms and human rights, 
calls for war, violence and o ther illegal actions in all their diversity 
must be recognised as illegal and threatening peace, justice and the 
foundations of international law. The publication and dissemination 
of this type of information must be suppressed through the 
development and application of a set of norms and collective 
measures. In this context, any discrimination of States in connection 
with their socio -political and ideological aspirations is also 
unacceptable.  
 
WHAT RISK DOES THE GDC ENTAIL? WHAT SHOULD BE TAKEN 
INTO ACCOUN T IN THE FUTURE WORK?  
 
It’s noted that the GDC has the potential to organize  a debate 
on digital technologies at the global level in the near future, despite 
the fact of the other discussion planform existence on the matter.  
Also the GDC has the potential to dilute international 
negotiations on information security by creating overlaps with 
platforms already in use that attempt to develop legally binding 
norms rather than declarative ICT principles, which runs counter to 
the needs of the global information community  
The provisions of the GDC are most probably be of a declarative 
nature and will not significantly affect the digital monopoly of 
individual countries and large corporations that are actively driving 
initiatives to form the GDC. Along with NGOs an d the academic 
community, global IT companies such as Google and Amazon, which, 
due to their transnational nature and accumulated capital, have more 
 
  
6 
opportunities to promote their ideas and convince the international 
community of those, even if their initi atives are not supported on the 
UN platform, are involved in the preparation of the GDC. 
Consequently, one of the stated principles - equality - will not be 
fulfilled.  
The development mechanism of the GDC may have a 
destructive impact due to a shift in emp hasis in decision -making from 
state actors to non -state actors in order to blur the boundaries 
between actors in the Internet ecosystem. In this regard, the GDC 
may have a negative impact on the viewpoint developed by a number 
of countries that state sover eignty must be respected, through the 
leading position of states as developers and implementers of norms. 
At the same time, the treaty will have no real impact on IT giants, 
since the provisions of the treaty will not be legally binding and, 
consequently, there will be no mechanism for monitoring their 
implementation and appropriate sanctions. Thus, the contract will 
not solve the problem of the need to regulate the activities of large 
IT-companies.  
Moreover, there is the question of whether non -state acto rs will 
be objective in their proposals and decisions, or whether such 
proposals and decisions will be fictitious in nature.  
Involvement of civil and academic communities, as well as the 
private sector, on an unequal basis is a threat to the interests of the 
global information community.  A mechanism must be devised to 
realise the principle of equality with respect to the Intern et in its 
entirety.  
There is also a risk that the discussion of the GDC will be 
another step towards politicizing  Internet governance issues. In 
particular, discussions on the draft future treaty could be used to 
make unfounded accusations of digital autho ritarianism against 
countries that take a digital sovereignty approach and draw an 
independent line in the information space. This is supported by the 
fact that during the international consultation on the GDC in New 
York in January 2023, the EU representa tive stated that the separate 
Declaration on the Future of the Internet, which is much disputed 
 
  
7 
due to its ideological dimension and State divisions, is " an important 
step to ensure a digital transition based on respect for human rights 
and principles of inclusive solidarity ". As such, there is likely to be a 
consolidation of efforts to promote unilateralism within the GDC.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 