  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research ICT Africa’s Submission to 
the Global Digital Compact  
 
What would a Just Global Digital Compact for Africa look 
like?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Workshop 17  
17 Dock Road  
V&A Waterfront  
Cape Town, 800 1 
South Africa  
Phone:  +27 21  447 6332  
www .researchictafrica.net  

  
Table of Contents  
Preface  4 
1. Introduction  1 
2. Policy prob lem  3 
2.1. Intersectional inequality and the digital inequality paradox  3 
2.1.1. The digital inequality paradox  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
2.1.2 Intersectional inequality  4 
2.1.3. Economic and social justice  5 
2.1.4. Public -interest research and public data  7 
3. The need for a governance framework in ensuring access to global digital public goods  8 
3.1 Balancing demand  side -valuation in resource  allocation with commercial, supply -side valuation of scarce 
resources  9 
3.2 Global governance of digital public goods  10 
3.3 Reco mmendations  11 
4. Critical themes  11 
4.1 Public data for evidence -based policy to redress digital inequa lity 11 
4.1.1 Recommendations  15 
4.2 Connectivity, access, pricing and quality  15 
4.2.1 Conne ctivity  15 
4.2.2 Pricing and affordability  16 
4.2.3 Quality  17 
4.2.4  Recomme ndations  18 
4. 3  E -Trade, labour, taxation and social protection  19 
4.3.1 Trade  19 
4.3.2 Labour  20 
4.3.3 Taxes  21 
4.3.4 Social protection  22 
4.3.5 Recommendations  22 
4.4 Data governance and realising data justice in Africa  23 
4.4.1 Data governance  25 
4.4.2 Data justice  26 
4.4.3 Reco mmendations  27 
4.5. Disinformation an d information disorders  27 
4.5.1 Information disorders in Africa  27 
4.5.2 Disinformation and content reg ulation  28 
4.5.3 Recommendations  30 
4.6 Harnessing AI for Africa  30 
4.6.1 Data governance tow ards innovation of AI in Africa  31 
4.6.2 AI and biometric identification  31 
4.6.3 AI and labour in Afric a 32 
4.6.4 Recommendations  32 
Annex 1. Summary of recommendations  34 
  
 
 Preface  
This submission i s based on a public consu ltation of an earl ier discussion paper that draws on the 
research and evidence base that Research ICT Africa (RIA)  has built over two decades  to support the 
development of contextualised policy and r egulatory strategies, as alterna tives to those that have 
failed to redress digital inequality and data injustice in Africa. The consultation took the form of a call 
for comments on the discussion paper,  either through email or an online form on the RIA website.  
We then held a consultati ve webinar to engage a multistakeholder audience on the content.  A 
French version of the webinar presentation was posted for comment.  RIA then revised the discussion 
document into this submission. This is intended to s erve as an evi dence base and propose d framing 
for the online submission made in response to the UN Secretary General’s  call for input  into a Global 
Digital Compact.   
The overarching question we asked in our public consultation, and which informs our research 
agenda is: what policies and forms of governance are required to realise global digital public goods  
at the nation al level, to redress digital ine quality, harness the potential of new technologies for social 
and economic development, improve public sector efficiency and delivery and create public value? 
This submission was  prepared by:   Alison Gillwald , Andrew Patri dge, Andrew Rens, Abdiaziz Ahmed, 
Araba Sey, Diana Nyakundi,  Guy Berger , Liz Orembo, Jackie Okello, Naila Govan Vassen , Rachael 
Adams, Roland  Banya, Sandra Makumbirofa, Samantha  Msipa, Senka Hazdic with contributions from 
Steve  Song.  
We wo uld also like to thank all RIA staff past and presen t who have built the repository of knowledge 
on which we draw, together with our partners  across Africa and collaborators across the world.  
The authors would like to thank the participants in its online consultations and the donors that made 
possible the independent research and the RIA ’s contribution to global regional and national policy 
processes such as these, particularly current donors IDRC,  SIDA, the Bill and Melinda Gat es 
Foundation and GIZ.   Th e views expressed are those of Research ICT Africa a nd do not represent or 
reflect those of the donors.  
For further information contact: Alison Gillwald agillwald@research ictafrica.net  or  Liz Oremb o 
lorembo@researchictafrica.net   
 
 
 
 
1 1. Introduction  
Research ICT Africa (RIA) welcomes this call for submissions for stakeholders to contribute to the 
development of a Global Digital Compact (GDC). We are an African digital policy, regulation and 
gov ernance think tank that has operated for two decades to fill a strategic gap in the development of 
a sustainable information society and di gital economy. Through rigorous and relevant research and 
analysi s, RIA seeks to build an African knowledge base in s upport of digital equality and data justice  
and to monitor and review developments on the continent. Our input into the GDC draws on the 
evidence base that we have built over two decades of digital polic y research,  and which supports the 
development of con textualised alternative policy and regulatory strategies to those that have thus 
far failed to redress digital inequality and int ensifying data injustice in Africa.    
The digitalisation of the e conomy and society and the datafication of almost all activiti es of the 
connected has promoted economic efficiency, increased access to the means of production and 
communication, and driven i nnovation. These developments have been extremely uneven however,  
both between and within countries, with most  the world’s popu lation still marginalised from access, 
or from productively using the Internet to enhance their well -being or to i mprove their livelihoods. 
Moreover, inequality is being exacerbat ed by the layering of advanced technologies such as machine 
learning and Arti ficial Intelligence (AI) over  existing  intersectional digital inequalities  – which already 
reflect underlying str uctural inequalities. These intensifying global processes of digi talisation and 
datafication are simultaneously accompanied by a plethora of i ndividual and (particularly poorly 
understood and defined) collective risks that, unmitigated, could result in wid espread harms to 
human rights, including to sustainable developme nt and democracy.  
UN Secretary -General Antonio Guterres identified this when he described digitalisation as one of two 
seismic shifts that will shape the 21st Century, the other being climate  change. He cautioned that 
both would  widen inequalities eve n further unless urgently addressed on a planetary scale.  
The COVID -19 pandemic h as further highlighted the compounding effects of digital inequality on 
underlying structural inequality. The  uneven capabilities of individuals, formal and informal firms, 
and states to mitigate the public health and economic risks associated with lockdow ns through the 
digital substitution of access to work, schooling, food -sourcing, public services and  social relief 
programmes have  highlighted the centrality of d igital inclusion. This bleak  scenario has been 
compounded by high incidences of geographic, ge nder, race and ethnic marginalisation and 
discrimination, particularly among refugees, who  fall out of even the most basic safety nets where 
they exist.  
This unevenness, marginalisation and exclusion  applies not only to economic and social 
participation, global competitiveness or the geopolitical positioning of states  but also to exercising 
effective citizenship. Rather than fostering politi cal inclusion, increased digitalisation is 
accompanied  by a sense of democratic erosion, disinformation and disorder i n an increasingly 
digitalised public sphere.  
 
2 To arrest the se negative trends and the lack of progress being made towards achieving th e 2030 
Sustainable Development Goals, the UN Secretary General has called for a renewal of the social 
contract, anchored in human rights and gender equality, to rebuild trust and so cial cohesion  
that people need to see reflected in their daily lives.   Hi ghlighting the centrality of digital 
inclusion in contemporary society, the Common Agenda, which was borne out of a declar ation 
by the General Assembly during its commemoration of 7 5th Anniversary in 2021, calls for a 
Global Digital Compact  that  “should a lso include updated governance arrangements to deliver 
better public goods and usher in a new era of universal social prot ection, health coverage, education, 
skills, decent work and  housing, as well as universal access to the Internet by 2030 as a basic hu man 
right so all citizens have a say in envisioning their countries’ futures.”  
The realities of underdevelopment in the G lobal South, combined with the speed of digitalisation, 
und erscore the need to innovate policy formulation, regulation and global gove rnance to propose 
solutions to the wicked policy problem of the digital inequality paradox . The paradox  lies in the fact 
that as more people are connected to the Internet – which has the potential to enable a new social 
compact, support economic and political state formation, and create  public data for policy and 
planning, job creation, resource mobilisation a nd redistribution –  this , in fact,  amplifies structural 
inequalities in developing countries as well as lends itself to disinforma tion operations that 
disadvantage already vulnerable people.  This has made it critical to find more inclusive and 
equitable ways of bringing people online, ensuring the capabilities not only to use general purpose 
technologies such as the Internet for per sonal use but also to deploy them to enhan ce their lives, 
produce value and contribute to the prosperity of nations a nd an information environment 
conducive to democracy and sustainable development.  
With its mission of accelerating digital equality and dat a justice in Africa, RIA has developed a 
comprehensive submission in response to the UN Secretary General’s call for inputs on the GDC 
as part of the Common Agenda. The overarching question the submission seeks to address is what 
policies and forms of gove rnance are required to realise global digi tal public goods at the national 
level, to redress digital inequality, harn ess the potential of new technologies for social and economic 
development, improve public sector efficiency and delivery and create public value.  
What is needed to protect citizens  from harms associated with being data subjects of big data 
collection and analytics and to mitigate the risks of ever -more pervasive extractive monopoly 
platforms that are nudging, shifting and modifying our behav iours?  This submission contends that 
non -siloed, transversal digital and data policy recognises the role of digital public goods as central to 
contemporary forms of democratic participation and as key inputs and enablers of economic 
transformation, togeth er with human development strategies and r ights preserving regulatory 
arrangements to redress intersectional inequali ty and foster integrity in the information 
environment.  Such a policy, under the right conditions and which acknowledges the political 
eco nomy of developing countries, will be esse ntial to post -pandemic economic reconstruction and 
the building of more dem ocratic, inclusive and equitable social compacts. The submission proceeds 
by identifying the wicked policy problems arising from digital in equality and data injustice, through 
an in tersectional inequality lens and  from an African perspective. It proposes for the GDC  a global 
digital public goods framing for the global  governance of the intensifying process of digitalisation 
3 and dataficatio n and in doing so it surfaces  seven  crit ical areas that could contribute significantly to 
more equitable and just d igital policy outcomes:  
▪ public data for evidence -based policy;  
▪ connectivity, access, pricing, quality;  
▪ e-trade, labour, taxation and social  protection;  
▪ data governance and data justice;  
▪ disinformation and the information disorder;  and  
▪ harnessing AI f or Africa (opportunities and harms).       
2. Policy problem  
Intensifying globalisation has been both driven and produced by dramatic technologica l innovation s  
and giant corporations that have resulted in  massive efficiencies and opportunities through 
digitalisation and datafication. However,  this has been highly uneven with the majority of the world 
population far removed from these benefits, but  still vulnerable to the harms.  
These developments have been ushered in by global oligopoly platforms o perating new forms of 
extractive capitalism, with platforms amassing large amounts of data on their users, which is used to 
both shape their online beha viou r and sold to advertisers for targeted advertising. At the same time, 
the platforms’ architectures h ave lent themselves to exploitation by actors whose business practices 
infringe human rights, while platform spending patterns have neglected the import ance  of 
monitoring, moderation and risk assessments in the Global South. These global trends have also 
enabled the emergence of a raft of disruptive digital and ‘virtual’ low -cost substitutes for physical 
services. On the one hand, they have offered new li velihood opportunities, such as Uber, AirBnB, 
AmazonTurk and Fiverr, but on the other, they have operate d outside of traditional market 
regulation and consumer and labour protections. Data from RIA’s After Access surveys  from 2018 and 
2022 confirmed the r epli cation of existing patterns of exploitation in these new work models .The 
governance of these comple x and adaptive systems is one of the most vexing policy problems facing 
states in their efforts to improve social and economic inclusion. It is problema tic not just from a 
resource allocation point of view, but also because it is, unchecked, exacerbating  existing socio -
digital inequalities and even introducing new ones.   
2.1. Digital inequality paradox  
As affordable and meaningful access to digital serv ices becomes critical to inclus ive social and 
economic engagement, and indeed to survival, as witnessed during the COVID -19 pandemic, 
redressing the digital inequality paradox  has become one of the most wicked policy problems of our 
time. Efforts to ensure digital equality, no t simply inclusion, have also b ecome more complex than 
they were a decade or two ago when policy concerns around the ‘digital divide’ reflected narrow 
connectivity challenge s resulting from lack of access to basic communication services. From a policy 
and regulatory perspective, the par adox lies in the empirical observation that as more people are 
4 connected, and as advanced technologies are layered over unevenly accessed and used foundational 
technologies, digital inequality is increasing. This is not only the case between those online a nd 
those offline (as is the case in a voice and basic text environment). It is also between those who have 
the technical and financial resourc es to use the Internet optimally, and those who are ‘barely’ online. 
The latter inc ludes those who only have parti al access to poor -quality or expensive data services that 
do not permit them to be 'always on' or to use data -intensive services. The gap is w idening between 
those who passively consume a limited number of basic services, tho se able to put technology to fu ll 
and productive use, and the few able to innovate and contribute to the prosperity of nations.  In 
addition, the competencies to understand and use ICTs in the contemporary global political 
economy are an essential element to consider, ranging from fluen cy in dominant languages through 
to media and information literacies.  
2.2. Intersectional inequality  
Confronting the digital inequality paradox requires an in -depth understanding of the complexity of 
these dynamic communicat ions systems and a more nua nced and granular understanding of the 
nature of inequality. Adopting an intersectional approach  to understanding inequality can help to 
over come the homogenising language of marginality, exclusion and poverty and draw attention to 
the relevance o f social context, power relations, social inequality, relationality, social justice and 
complexity. For analytical purposes , these concepts facilitate understanding of how digital inequality 
is shaped by the intersection of multiple social i dentities, and the multifaceted points of policy 
intervention required to redress or reduce it.  
For example, social context is especially  significant when importing policy reforms designed in the 
Global North into the Global South, as their implementation  may translate into different outcomes 
from those experienced in the Global North. Likewise, exami ning social inequality at national and 
global levels shows how power relations and social justice are linked not only to human rights 
considerations but also to complex dynamics of global economic inequality. Indeed, while the digital 
divide is the gap bet ween those who do and do not have access  to digital technologies, it more 
importantly concerns the significant economic opportunity made possible through tech nology, as 
well as capacities to affect governance around the control of such technology and wider  digital 
literacies.  
Without economic or  material justice, the rules may appear to be equally applied to everyone, yet 
still produce unequal and unfair outcom es. Acknowledging these complexities provides the multiple 
lenses necessary to conceptualise the d ynamic and globalised processes of digit alisation and 
datafication that we seek to measure and on which basis we seek to develop policy. An example is 
that op en access data is in theory open to all interested actors, but in practice can be put to most use 
by powerful, private interests, unless p roactive policy measures are applied.  
2.3 Gender equity  
One critical area of application is in gender equity . Based o n the premise that the Internet can 
contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development G oals (SDGs), calls for digital equality 
have been foremost in organisational agendas both at the international and national levels over the 
5 years. One of the precepts of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development – “leave no one behind” 
– hinges on gender  equality. SDG Goal 5b specifically iden tifies the enhanced use of enabling 
technology, in particular ICTs, to promote the empowerment of women.  
As Internet access figures increase, gender indicators will move towards the parity  seen in mobile 
voice serv ices. But this is a long way off in most  developing countries. It will also not happen 
equitably, since those at the intersection of multiple inequalities are  least likely to come online, even 
as coverage increases, and prices decrease.  Women in seemingly  similar country contexts face very 
different outcomes in terms of equal access to and use of technology. Even within countries, stark 
differences are observe d for women accessing the Internet, across factors such as geographic 
distributions, education, ag e and business formalisation. The widesp read abuse of women online 
must also be taken into account, due to its likely influence in dissuading women (especiall y 
journalists, activists and politicians) from full engagement online even when they have the tech nical 
and economic capacities for access . The influence of these factors on access and use are themselves 
not independent from each other either. There is a s trong need for deeper analysis of nationally 
representative individual -level data to better und erstand these intersectional inequalities, and the 
linkages between technological developments and their potential to contribute to socio -economic 
development. T his will require systemically redressing underlying structural inequalities that are 
mirrored i n digital inequality.  Equitable digital in clusion will require not only digital policy 
interventions but integrated strategies to improve education and employme nt opportunities and 
thereby incomes. This will ensure the right policy interventions which do not exacerbate current 
inequalities.  This is discussed further in the  next section.  
The implications of failing to address digital inequality in the information  era are severe as the 
Secretary General has pointed out.  While global reform and donor agenda s have shifted from 
foundational digital in equality to issues of machine learning, AI for development and the ethics of 
technical design, the ramifications and g overnance challenges of remedying inequality and exclusion 
in the digital polity and economy ar e not unrelated. The exclusion of people fr om online financial 
services, remote and platform work, and digital production makes them invisible in the data 
extrac ted by global monopoly digital platforms for the purposes of creating lucrative digital 
intelli gence.  
As a result, those at the intersect ion of multiple inequalities, of class, race, gender, citizenship and 
ethnicity, are underrepresented and discriminate d against in automated algorithmic decision -
making. While proposed ethical and responsible desi gn in data -driven technologies may go some 
way to alleviating some of the obvious problems associated with bias and lack of transparency, they 
are unable to deal  with the structural inequalities reflected in the generation of data at scale and the 
systemic  perpetuation of historical injustices in t heir application to millions of micro decisions made 
daily on the basis of giant social networking data sets.  
2.4 Economic and social justice   
While these structural inequalities will only be addressed through more fundamental economic and 
social transfor mation, there are some systemic issues that can be redressed through policy 
intervention. At the very least it wil l require the regulation of gl obal digital public goods such as  
6 spectrum, Internet, and data to ensure access to the means of communication a nd production and a 
system of governance to mitigate against the associated risks. To promote more equitable and j ust 
outcomes, economic regulat ion (as well as other regulatory arrangements)  is necessary to enable 
more even distribution of the opportuniti es arising from the data economy, not only the prevention 
of harms to democracy and development. Awareness about t he value of data for socio -economic 
development and its ability to contribute to the realisation of the 2015 UN SDGs has become 
increasingly p revalent.  
With the global crisis precipitated by COVID -19, the growing dominance and linkages of data, big data 
analytics, the Internet -of-Thin gs (IoTs) and algorithms have placed data as a key resource in public 
health management and economic reconstruct ion. This has amplified the need for data governance 
and institutional arrangements to reduce the current unevenne ss of digitalisation and dataf ication 
within and between countries. The emerging literature and practice of data governance have mostly 
been a pproached from a negative regulatory perspective. That is to say it has sought to prevent 
harms in relation to rig hts violations and mitigate as sociated risks – particularly privacy and security 
but also freedom of expression. Positive discrimination to re dress intersectional inequality in the 
areas of access to affordable, adequate quality broadband, consumer protect ion, data protection, 
public p rocurement and data access and sharing is required. Likewise, media and education literacy, 
including digital po litical economy and digital rights, is also needed.  
While various global and local epistemic communities are grapp ling with these issues, increa singly in 
relation to AI becoming the next general -purpose technology, very little of this has focused on 
econom ic governance. Yet  there are many areas of data governance such as data availability, 
accessibility, usability, i ntegrity, as well as concerns about ownership, impacts on trade and 
competition that require positive regulatory or governance intervention. B alancing current 
commercial, supply -side valuation of data used in the allocation of resources and which has 
produ ced these outcomes, with the d emand -side valuation in the allocation of resources that 
recognises their social value including as common goods  is necessary  to ensure more inclusive and 
equitable  policy outcomes.  
Some of the reasons for this lack of attention to economic regulation (and to the neglected area of 
demand -side value of poo led resources) relate the heterogeneity of data and the complexity of the 
governance of different kinds of data.  But as  IT for Change  has noted , “it suits those in whom much 
of the value of data collected from across the world is concentrated for there to be no regulation … 
Calls for the opening up of data m arkets or data flows without e nabling the fair and equitable 
participation of individuals, communities and countries disadvantage mostly countries in the Global 
South and groups that are currently marginalised  in the value chains and hierar chies from the global 
digital economy …”   
The pandem ic and lockdowns have also amp lified the scope for the private sector to fulfil traditional 
public sector roles, or at least become significan tly involved in their delivery  without necessarily t he 
same accountability as the state. These partnerships create new power relations with which 
substantive laws have been slow to engage. In ad dition, many developing countries are increasingly 
reliant on digital giants in the Global North for the developme nt of digital responses to a v ariety of 
problems (e.g., contact -tracing apps’ reliance on a Google -Apple API), while a handful of digital gian ts 
7 are playing an increasingly central role in various aspects of the digitalisation of all parts of life  
leading to concerns of  ‘digital colonialism’  and ‘surveillance capitalism’ , along wit h a plethora of 
other risks th at are unfolding in digital contexts (e.g., those related to abuse of digital dominance). 
These present global r egulatory challenges in which cross -border power evades national regulation. 
This is especially probl ematic  when such regulation is democratic, has adequate checks and 
balances, is participative  and aligned to human rights, which are foregone by the cross -border 
operations of digital giants.  
2.5 Public -interest research and public data  
Despite  such concerns, and the focus on preventing harms and mitigating risks associated with the 
intensifying processes of datafication and digitalisation, research and syst ems of global governance  
are still limited. The tools that do exist fo r evalu ating the outcomes or implications of these 
processes either tend to be applied to assess the collateral benefits of ICTs or to potentially negative 
outcomes in primarily Global N orth contexts, rather than considering the likely very different impac ts 
in the very different contexts  of developing countries. In the absence of public statistics and public -
interest research, information is highly asymmetrical between citizens and commu nities and the 
public and private sector,  particularly big tech wh ose business is to extract data on a global scale to 
create and sell market intelligence from which super profits are made. High -quality public data is 
necessary to identify the precise poi nts of policy intervention, the necessary regulation, and ar eas of 
international cooperation required for governance. Public data is also required for planning and 
implementation and to measure and assess policy and regulatory outcomes and the progress bei ng 
made towards a more equitable and sustainable planet . Without access to the swathe of data in the 
private sector, regulation cannot be evidence -based, and policies for mitigation and empowerment 
will be weakened.  
8 3. The need for a governance framework i n ensuring access to global 
digital public goods  
Box 1 :  What are public goods?  
Although the term ‘public good’ is popularly used interchangeably with ‘public interest’, referring to 
something  that is ‘good for the public’ (e.g., water, forests, knowledge etc.), in economic terms it is 
distingui shed from private goods in that a public good is inherently non -rivalrous in consumption (it is 
infinitely usable without detracting from another person's ability to use it). While private goods are 
excludable, publi c goods are naturally non -excludab le, wh ich means that there are no natural barriers 
to using them. Free -to-air public broadcasting (spectrum) is often cited as a classical example of a 
public good in that the use of free -to-air radio or television (tradit ionally the public broadcaster)  b y one 
person does not detract from another person’s use (assuming no interference with the signal or 
congestion). It is also non -excludable in that unlike an encrypted subscription service, no one can be 
prevented from usi ng a free -to-air service .   
Publ ic goods  are typically expected to be funded by means of a general contribution.  However, the 
challenges of mobilising public (state) resources for the provisioning of public goods have  begun to 
focus attention on providing  public goods through some f orm of exclusion, thereby allowing the market 
to play a much greater role in delivering such goods. This effectively renders most public goods impure  
in that they have been made excludable, often through regulation or for purpos es of commercialisation, 
mon etisation and profit at the expense of public -service obligations or access. Although theoretically 
debates over state and private provisioning have been polarised, in practice, state and no n-state actors 
regulate each other’s c apacities to provide, access , and distribute public goods, often in ways that 
compromise the ideal of public goods.  Democratic regulation can, however, uphold public interest by 
excluding actors or practices that serv e only private interest, and conversel y can promote actors and 
practices that do align with  the societal value of having inclusive public goods.  
 
Over the past three decades, the liberalisation and privatisation of traditionally publicly provisioned 
communications services has driven innovati on, creating an increasing ly complex and adaptive 
global digital ecosystem. However, regulation has always la gged innovation and market 
developments, and is seldom flexible enough to enable market innovation while providing certainty 
to long -term infrastru cture investors,  ensuring  positive consumer welfare outcomes, and 
safeguarding citizens from online harms to  human rights. Further, the creation of regulated 
competitive markets for the private provisioning of publicly provisioned goods such as the mobile  
telecommunications, has n ot been extended to the Internet, or data -driven technologies and 
platforms which h ave been largely unregulated.  Although often presented as successful policy 
outcomes of the traditional economic and competition regulators, mecha nisms of universal service s 
funds to deal with market failures (or more accurately the market efficiency gap)  have not been 
successful.   Large parts of the world lack  the institutional endowments even to create and 
effectively regulate private markets, m uch less the new forms of multistakeholder governance 
9 required to manage these increasingly complex, adaptive  systems. In addition, both driven by and in 
response to intensifying globalisation, issues of cross -jurisdictional and global governance arose. 
Even where these digital go ods were developed in more mature economies, advanced technologies 
have been treat ed as private goods, unregulated and highly excludable, despite having been 
developed with public investments . 
In response to the limitations of pola rised state (public) ve rsus market (private) ideological positions, 
more pragmatic and appropriate forms o f global governance have emerged.  New forms of ‘public’, 
best understood as practices or communities of practice and distinct from traditional state notions of 
public, have  emerged both in relation to the delivery and governance of public goods. These inc lude 
community stations, community networks, spectrum commons and free public Wi -FI and data 
commons, and alternative forms of data stewardship such a s trusts.  
This has re sulted in normative dilemmas that have both challenged and reinforced liberal 
democ ratic norms and multilateral decision making, as global governance has been absent,  
transformed or reconstituted.   
The growing prevalence of collabor ative forms of public goods governance (see below) does not 
mean the end of the sovereign state; but it d oes change its nature and obligations in an increasingly 
integrated world. In the state -market interplay, the state plays an important enabling role of  
coordinating the priv ate delivery of public goods and in ensuring the governance of global public 
goods at the national level. Despite the extensive role of private and commercial delivery of 
information infrastructure, with the increased positive externa lities derived from di gital and data 
infrastructure (including data governance), the role of the state as  coordinator and regulator in 
ensuring its provision and management is still required to ensure widespread access by citizens, fair 
distribution of soc ial gains and the miti gation of risks.  
3.1. Balancing demand side -valuation in resource allocation with 
commercial, supply -side valuation of scarce resources  
Regulatory and economic analyses of privately delivered public goods over the past three decades 
have relied on the com mercial, supply -side value of information, and  financial and e -trade flows 
with re gards to the governance of global public goods. To develop alternative global governance 
rationales, this submission makes the case for recognising the  often ignored demand -side value of 
public goods that are more likely to ensure digital inclusion in a de veloping country context. A 
demand -side analysis  focused on value -creation h ighlights that the out puts of digital infrastructure 
industries are generally public and ‘non -market’ goo ds that create positive multipliers in both 
economy and  society . 
This is why some classes of key resources (like broadband Internet, spectrum or data) need demand -
side valuation as opposed to the usual supply -side valuations to properly recognise and account for 
their public utility. Demand -side valuation, whether of br oadband Internet, spectrum or of data, 
enables public -interest governance of a resourc e as a non -rivalrous, low -excludability public good 
that can be accessed for the purposes of public planning, entrepreneurship and democratic 
accountability. Balancing th e commercial valuation of resources necessary to ensure delivery of 
10 certain public goo ds such as digital and data infrastructure with a demand -side approach, enables 
the creation of a commons, allowing those who are unable to afford commercial services to access 
spectrum through unlicensed spectrum  or data through data lakes or alternative  forms of data 
stewardship. Doing so also enables policy perspectives to shift , for example, from narrow negative 
regulation with rules and penalties  focused mainly on compliance such as in spectrum management 
or data protection to more positive regulati on that redresses inequalities and enables participation, 
to meet the objectives of  digital equality and data justice.  
3.2. Global governance of digital public goods  
The  rise of the Internet as a global digital public good underpinning global trade, finan cial and 
information flows requires  new forms of global cooperation. The shift in traditional power relations 
between states, markets and citizens in global gover nance has blurred notions of ‘international’ and 
‘national’ and of what constitutes public and  private. After several decades of private interests 
dominating evolving forms of data governance, the role of public regulation of the Internet and 
specifically platforms has re -emerged as a priority. The current challenges to ensure the provision of 
glob al digital public goods lie in the increasing complexity and adaptiveness of the global 
communications system and the shifting global governance responses to thes e. These include 
complementary and competing systems of governance ranging from nation -state -based  multilateral 
systems that have traditionally governed and coordinated global development, to new 
multistakeholder formations accommodating state, private sector and civil society interests, as well 
as to new forms of private authority, both commercial  and non -commercial as found in ICANN. 
However, Africa has been almost invisible in these developments.  
The  question arising is how Africa can better locate itself in global governance processes, not only to 
ensure better outcomes in its own diverse intere sts but to participate more actively in setting the 
global agenda .  A key issue here  is its capacity to do so.   Understanding the Internet as an (impure) 
global public good  depends on Africa (and other regions) acquiring the relevant national and global  
governance capacity to operationalise this understanding. This is because global  consensus on the 
good governance of the Internet  (cybersecurity or data protection for example) only emerges, in 
considerable measure, to the extent that countries can reprodu ce this consensus at the national (or 
regional and sub -regional) level (e.g., c reating the conditions for private delivery of public goods such 
as the Internet, or complying with global agreements to enforce cybersecurity). Understanding the 
Internet as a global digital public good can only be defended through the imple mentation at a  
national level in all countries including developing countries of this understanding, often through an 
imperfect global governance consensus.  
Underpinning the policy and regula tion of global digital public goods  is that they are a  common good 
that has to be made available to all. While the concept of paying for national public goods such as 
providing education or protecting clean air is widely understood, it is less clear who sh ould be held 
responsible for general -purpose globa l public goods , such as the Internet, that serve the common 
interest. While investment in global public goods has traditionally taken the form of official 
development assistance (ODA), new forms of internat ional cooperation and institutions that will 
suppo rt the develop ment of global digital public goods and ensure greater digital inclusion are 
11 necessary. This has produced highly uneven results. More effective and shared measures such as 
better global resour ce mobilisation through digital taxes  or ot her solidarity  mechanisms that have 
been discussed in this submission will be essential innovations to ensure the universal availability of 
these common goods.  
This submission applies this understanding of the nee d for effective governance of global digita l 
public goods  to the role of developing countries in Internet, data and platform governance and the 
development of public digital and data infrastructure. It draws on research that has used the concept 
to track a nd explain the funding of overt technical a ssistance, and  the tacit lobbying by various 
interests (represented by multilateral agencies, global digital platforms, and industry associations) to 
ensure the implementation of preferred global frameworks for cy bersecurity, data protection and 
data gover nance at the r egional and national level. This submission also calls for greater 
engagement and participation in global governance by African states, and in relation to their 
potential for enforcing the legitimate  taxation of revenues by global platforms t hat, without t heir 
physical presence in countries, is unenforceable.  
3.3. Recommendations  
Digital and data public infrastructure – integrated  broadband network infrastructure, the data and 
services level and appli cations such as digital identif ication and pa yment systems – can only be 
realised at the national level as a result of the global governance of global digital public goods.  Even 
if privately provisioned, the state needs , through public interest  policy and  regulation , to ensure 
equitab le access to public digital  infrastructure  so that  what should be common infrastructures does 
not serve a small elite segment of the population.  
4. Critical themes  
4.1. Public data for evidence -based policy to redre ss digita l ine quality  
There is a severe lack of good quality and publicly available data that captures digital inequalities 
faced by marginalised groups, particularly in relation to the needs of those who are offline and to the 
situation in countries which have fa llen furthest behind in digital access. Complex and nuanced 
concepts such as gender tend to be reduced to narrow binary or categorical framing. Such 
approaches fail to recognise heterogeneity within categories and  the intersectional nature of 
inequalities . Eff orts to m ove beyond descriptive statistics allow for some demonstration of the 
various factors determining the exclusion of people living at the intersections of multiple 
inequalities.  To appropriately inform and influence decision -making, it is nece ssary  to produ ce 
rigorous data differentiated along multiple dimensions to help isolate the exact points of policy 
intervention required. To this end, through its nationally representative After Access surveys , RIA has 
been producing high -quality data on digitalisation and datafication in Africa since 2004.  
The After Access surveys   show how ho useh olds interact with ICTs across multiple countries in Africa, 
providing valuable insig hts into digital inequalities, including with respect to gender.  Data from the 
2022 round shows contrasting gendered trends across different countries (Figure 1). In Sout h Africa, 
for example, Internet access has increased significantly since 2018 and the  gender gap has been 
12 reduced to a negligible level. On the other hand, in Nigeria, while the gender gap has declined since 
2018, overall, Internet access has also decl ined . In Uganda, overall Internet access has increased but 
mainly for men, with the gende r gap widening since 2018.  
Figure 1: Internet access and gender gaps  in South Africa, Nigeria and Uganda; 2012, 2018 and 
2022  
 
Data Source: ( RIA, 2012, 2018, 2022 ) 
 
The survey  highlights the risks of aggregating statistics on digitalisation both within African 
countries, and for Africa as a whole. In all three countries there has been a sig nificant increase in 
Internet access at the household level since 2018, covering the COVI D-19 period over which the share 
of consumers reporting an increase in the frequency of Internet use ranged from 67% to 70%. 
However, across all three countries, the i ncre ase happened almost entirely before the pandemic and 
those who were not online before  it occurred were unable to digitally substitute and will have been 
further marginalised by the increasing prominence of the digital economy.  
Similar considerations a re p ertinent for gender data. Gender is inseparable from race, class, culture 
and religio n, and cannot be understood in terms of discrete, quantifiable indicators to which it is 
often reduced in descriptive statistics or digital indicators. The importance of considering 
intersectionality is demonstrated in the Internet access rates for differe nt groups of females (Figure 2 
below). Whilst levels vary, there is a universal variation in access based on geographic location, 
income and education, highlighting th e he terogeneity of females. Moreover, those who face extreme 
digital marginalisation  are  individuals at the intersections of these inequalities, for example, rural 
females with low levels of education residing in low -income households.  

13 Figure 2: Internet acce ss for females by geographic location, income level and education  
 
Data Source: ( RIA, 2022 ) 
 
Whereas it is advocated within the UN Statistical  system that ICT surveys be conducted on a regular 
basis, across most countries in the Global South there are almost no  dedicated resources to do so 
and at best a few digital indicators included in national censuses or household surveys. In addition, 
much of the very limited quantita tive research fails to assess the intersectional nature of 
marginalisation. The World Bank’ s World Development Report ( World Bank, 2021 ) notes that when 
data quality is poor, it lacks gran ularity, accuracy, and comparability. It also notes that the gaps in 
data on women and girl s are particularly severe. Only 10 of the 54 gender -specific indicators (19%) in 
the SDGs are widely available and only 24% of the available gender -specific indicato rs are from 2010 
or later.   
The increased availability and usability of big data provides valuable opportunities for analysing 
consumer behaviour, but from a policy perspective there needs to be more focus on analysing the 
behaviour and needs of the margi nalised and those whose rights to expression and access to 
information are at risk. A major  challenge in collecting data on marginalised groups and in 
marginalised countries is that most individuals operate “invisibly” and, as they are not online or 
minima lly so, need to be identified so that the multiple factors preventing people coming online are 
as well understood as the factors enabling people coming online.  
Access levels are not the ‘be all and end all’, and it is important that digitalisation efforts ensure that 
once individuals gain Internet access, they are also able to equally use the In ternet meaningfully and 
without fear. Rights must be respected online, as offline. In South Africa, the gender gap has been 
eliminated at the national level.  Howeve r, when viewing specific uses of the Internet through a 
gender lens, it is clear that femal es are at a disadvantage when compared to men. In nine (75%) out 
of twelve use categories, male use is higher than that of females (Figure 3).  
 

14  
Figure 3: Gender gap s in Internet use amongst online individuals, 2022  
 
Data Source: ( RIA, 2022 ) 
Whilst the After Access surveys provide valuable insights, they are limited to a small selection of 
African countries and the contrasting situations and trends observed across these countries s how 
that these cannot be considered accurate representations for the rest of the continent. Outside of 
these surveys, such data is in critically short supply.  
 
Box 2  
A successful initiative in addressing the  problem of the dearth of public data has been 
implemented by the Regional Centre for Studies on the Development of the Information Society 
(Cetic.br ), a department of the Braz ilian Network Information Centre ( NIC.br ). Through Cetic .br, a 
percentage of Domain Name Subscription (DNS) fees are pooled to fund the conducting of surveys 
to provide robust ICT statistics and to undertake research to e nsure inclusive access and use of 
technologies. If such a model could be adopted on the Afr ican continent, it would ensure data is 
generated to speak to the reality for all countries.  
 
In summary, despite an increase in the number of individuals who are abl e to access and use digital 
technologies, there remain large gaps across different region s, across different countries within 
regions, across different population groups within countri es and even within population groups at 
the intersections of other inequ alities. Moreover, once analysis moves beyond access alone to assess 
the ability to use d igital technologies in a meaningful and safe way, even wider inequalities surface. 
Whilst the C OVID -19 pandemic accelerated digitalisation around the world, evidence s uggests this 
mainly came in the form of increases in intensity of use by those already on line, with those offline 
before the pandemic facing further marginalisation. It is also necessa ry to underline that even when 
all conditions are considered for ensurin g optimum access to the Internet, there need to be 
conditions related to the supply side – such as local content online, independent journalism and a 

15 free flow of information in line w ith the right to freedom of expression and access to information in 
inte rnational human rights law.  
Nationally representative individual -level data on ICT access  and use is critical for identifying the 
precise points of policy intervention in evidence -base d policy making. Without this, national 
indicators and assessments of us ers' needs will always be biased towards more developed countries 
and towards those who h ave already been integrated into the digital economy.  
4.1.1 . Recommendations  
Given the above, the following policy recommendations are made:  
▪ Produce better data:  The  UN statistical system is currently unable to obtain the granular 
data required for digit al policy and planning from developing countries. An international 
mechanism needs to be develo ped to ensure the collection of digital public statistics as a 
public go od, accessible and usable by all, and with all necessary ethical and rights -preserving 
aspects of gathering large data sets. This should include efforts to support African use of such 
data, including by supporting regional entities such as the African Unio n, UN Economic 
Commission for Africa (UNECA) and the African Development Bank to coordina te statistical 
collection. This will require enhancing the capacity of national statistical off ices and political 
commitment to do so. In addition, efforts are needed for enabling and tapping into academic 
and civil society expertise on the continent to su pport the collection and analysis of 
nationally representative demand -side statistics.  
▪ Establi sh a digital solidarity fund:  As a single key recommendation for the cre ation of 
global digital data as a public good, it is proposed that there is a 1% contribu tion from the  
DNS  registration  fees  of all countries globally towards a digita l solidarity fund. This could be 
allocated based on applications by stat es to the fund to enable the gathering of digital data 
that can be disaggregated, analysed and evaluated . 
▪ End siloed ICT policies : Develop evidence -based transversal digital strategies  focused on 
human development, that foster more equitable social and  economic inclusion, and which 
include  rights -preserving regulatory arrangements needed to redress intersect ional 
inequalities reflected in the uneven impacts of digital devel opments.  
4.2. Connectivity, access, pricing and quality  
The UN has decla red access to the Internet  as essential to the exercising of the right to freedom of 
expression and opinion  and othe r fundamental human rights , calling on states to ensure that 
affordable broadband access is available to their citi zens and access to the Internet is not unlawfully 
restricted. Yet m ost Africans do not have access to the Internet, and for many of the few  who do, their 
use is highly constrained by the price of broadband data and the quality of services.  
4.2.1 . Connecti vity 
While telecommunications market liberalisation resulted in a communications revolution that 
connected Africa to the world through mult iple undersea cables and cross -border fibre networks 
traversing most parts of the continent and  brought basic telecom munications to the vast majority of 
16 Africans, very f ew of this vast majority actually use the Internet. This is despite mobil e broadband 
coverage being above 75% in most countries and well above 90% in many. This problem with low 
Internet usage on the cont inent  is the result of both supply - and demand -side  constraints. 
Broadband coverage  has been commercially driven with very few success stories of Universal Service 
Funds (USFs) successfully dealing with the connectivity gap in areas where  low rates of p rofit mean 
that private telecommunications companies  are not willing to invest in network extension in those 
areas. Sometimes  referred to as market failure, the gap has more accurately been described as a 
market efficiency gap.  
USFs are usually financed t hrough mandatory contributions by telecom operators,  with the intention 
of the fund being dispersed back to the operators or other entities to support connecting the 
unconnected and underserved. However , these have not delivered on the promise of better 
connectivity nor have they been updated to include the new range of connectivity providers that 
emerged over the last 10 -15 year s.    
The equitable assignment of spectrum in a manner that best serves national strategic interests 
remains a challenge. Spectrum  auctions have proven difficult to execute well. High fees paid at 
auction may be a windfall for the exchequer but have been s hown to result in lower consumer 
welfare through reduced network roll -out and higher consumer prices.  
4.2.2 . Pricing and affordabi lity  
Despite significant investments in network extension, these have often not been effectively regulated 
to produce competi tive markets and ensure positive consumer welfare outcomes.  Even with the 
price reductions documented in the RIA Africa Mobile Pricing  (RAMP)  Index we know from the After 
Access that the main barrier to Internet take -up and u se relates  to the affordability of a smart device 
and, once people  are connected, the price of data.  We also know from modelling data that what  
determines access and intensity of use is education and, its corollary, income (employment). Women, 
especially t hose at the intersection of multiple other inequalities, are overr epresented amongst 
those without access.  
We also know that it is almost impo ssible to deliver broadband services at less than 2% of the 
monthly GNI per capita  of least developed – and even  several developing countries – as proposed by 
the Broadband Commi ssion. This is particularly not possible with the current high cost of GSM 
technologies, inefficient business models, high transactional cost of spectrum assignment, and 
regressive excise ta xes on low -end smart devices, social media and mobile money.   
RIAs After Access surveys show, in South Africa and Uganda, 70% and 61% cited da ta prices are the 
main impediments to access respectively ( RIA, 2022 ).  The evidence of these high data prices is 
highlighted in the RAMP Index database  which  tracks the cheapest data and voice/SMS basket prices 
for each mobile network operator in Africa, on a quarterly  basis.  Figure 4 shows the average price for 
a 1GB monthly basket charged in different African countries in Quar ter 1, 2023. Research  has shown 
that the high data price s in African countries  are due  to a lack of competition  in the mobile operator 
markets.  
17 Figure 4: Top five cheapest and bottom 1 3 cheapest 1GB mobile data pric es in Africa in Quarter 
1, 2023  
  
Source: RIA’s Retail African Mobile Pricing (RAMP) Index, 2023  
 
4.2.3 . Qualit y  
On Internet quality, progress is evident. Coverage through 3G increased by 186% between 2010 and 
2020, and 4G coverage has increased threefol d in the last five  years. However , the Speedtest by Ookla  
shows that African countries still have on average low  mobile and fixed Internet speeds. Even before 
the pandemic, Internet speed was below the acceptable threshold o f 10mbps, considered the lower 
bound for a good quality broadband service.  
Because of these serious access challenges to do with connectivity, p ricing and quality, we cannot 
continue to do the same things in relation to affordable universal access policy a nd regulation and 
hope  for different outcomes. We propose a fundamentally different approach to redressing access, 
use and connectivity is sues. Through more effectively regulated competitive markets that enable 
cost -based wholesale access to incumbent netw orks, and entry into the m arket of alternative and 
cheaper business models and technologies to meet the needs of all citizens, the infrast ructure and 
services gaps can be met in a way that dominant operators are unlikely to. Considerably cheaper 
services c ould be provided through r egional dynamic spectrum licensing particularly in underutilised 
rural areas  and micro and community stations w ith access to shared or common infrastructure.  
Regulation which served well in predictable, slow -moving markets is no longer able to keep u p with 
the pace of technological change and is often failing to enable smaller, nimbler organisations that 
can a ddress access challenges with new technologies and business models.  Balancing the dominant 
commercial valuation of spectru m with demand -side va luation that recognises it as public good, and 
critical as a downstream input with both social and economic mult ipliers, is essential to achieve a 
more equitable global digital compact. This includes setting aside spectrum for common u se and to 
enable free  public access at schools and other public buildings.  

18 4.2.4 .  Recommendations  
▪ Build capacity among regulators : Regulatory frameworks are not keeping up with 
technological progress, the consequences of which are most obvious in spectru m 
management and admi nistering of USFs. Therefore,  it is essential for other stakeholders 
(such as civil society and academia) to be i nvolved by:  
- Providing training to national regulators, regional regulatory authorities, policy 
makers and public fund hold ers on the constantly evolving technology landscape.  
- Working together with regulators and policy makers to study the impact of 
innovat ions on their own policy and regulatory frameworks, and update the 
frameworks accordingly.  
- Reviewing strategic plans via p ublic consultations, w hich can eventually lead to the 
creation of dedicated projects addressing a specific issue.  
▪ Develop innovative r egulatory approaches:   Regulatory approaches to increasing 
connectivity are often designed to favour incumbents as the dri vers of an expansion in 
access. Non -traditional connectivity providers and complementary access solutions, such as 
small operators and  community networks, remain overlooked and often do not fit into 
existing licensing regimes. However, they are relevant ac tors particularly in providing last -
mile connectivity and need to be considered when the goals are connecting underserved 
areas and lo wering the price of a ccess.  
▪ Public financing: Through evidence -based analysis assess the value and regulatory 
transactions  costs of USF access funds in contributing to the achievement of affordable, 
meaningful access. If infrastructural deficits remain,  c reate more agile and accountable USFs 
that reach the unconnected and underserved, while promoting competition and resilien cy 
through a more diverse operator/provider base. The rules around governing and operating 
these public funds should evolve as technol ogies evolve. Alterna tively,  use  the funds to 
support the demand -side barrier to adoption such as digital skills shortag es. shift the levy for 
the  provisioning of digital public goods to higher value contributions from operators and 
platforms such as da ta. Mandate that publ ic access to big data that could be used as 
administrative data and that currently sit behind a veil of unjustified confidentiality, be 
opened ,  even six months after market use for public policy and planning.  Mandating 
contributions  to data commons are all potentially of higher social value and easier to 
implement.  
▪ Infrastructure sharing: Regulatory pr ovisions for mandating infrastructure sharing can 
counter market concentration and minimise unnecessary redundancy and duplication of 
investments in suppor ting infrastructure (ducts, poles, towers, energy distribution grids). 
This allows for reallocation o f infrastructure costs to investments in service quality 
improvements, and reduces the market entry barrier for non -traditional connec tivity 
providers and complementary access solutions.  
19 ▪ Provide incentives for serving  rural, remote, or underserved areas:  Create  regulatory 
enabled  business models where small operators help incumbents achieve universal service 
obligations. Introduce si mplified licence exem ptions or licensing with low transaction costs 
for small operators and community networks.  
▪ Promote sp ectrum sharing:  Traditional operators have the rights to use portions of the 
spectrum nationwide, but only deploy their services in ec onomically viable are as. New 
approaches in spectrum assignment should take into account recent innovations that enable 
dyn amic spectrum access and spectrum sharing.  
▪ Relinquish spectrum that is not in use: Develop administrative incentives to encourage 
licence holders to relinq uish spectrum that is not in use (“use it or share it”). Give operators 
spectrum auction price or  ta x rebates on 5G spectrum licences for sharing their currently 
assigned spectrum.  
▪ Allow wholesale access in the data market : To reduce  anti -competitive pra ctices in the 
data markets in Africa, allowing wholesale access, such as for the costs of roaming and  
facilities leasing facilities, would allow the late entrants room to compete.  
▪ Prohibit of social media and mobile money excise taxes : These taxes are regr essive as they 
impact on the welfare of people and the affordability of Internet access.  
▪ Open data an d transparency: For all the above mentioned recommendations to be 
efficiently implemented, there is a need for open telecommunication data (detailed 
inform ation on existing infrastructure, equipment, spectrum assignment plans, fibre 
backbone etc.) as well as transparent information about the backhaul pricing.  
 
4.3.  E-Trade, labour, taxation and social protection  
The UN Secretary General  has called for a renewed social compact in the context of post pandemic 
economic recovery. He has highlighted that human -centred recovery from the pandemic needs 
employment and social protection policies to work in tandem, not only  to improve people’s liv ing 
standards, but also to navigate the challenges of a rapidly changing modes of work (digitalisation) 
and the transition  towards the goal of net zero carbon emissions by 2050. With digital companies 
making up the vast majority of global value add, they a re also an obvious source for resource 
mobilisation for post pandemic economic and social reconstruction. The Global Digit al Compact is a 
complementary framework that can enable opportunities associated with these developments while  
mitigating potential ha rms .  
4.3.1 . Trade  
To unlock the value of digital trade for the benefit of all, there is a need to design inclusive global  
digital trade and data policies that acknowledges the critical role that African countries and labour 
play ac ross the digital and dat a value chain, from the provision of scarce minerals to labour used for 
online content moderation.  The African Continenta l Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) provides an enabling 
trading space for African businesses and industries to leverag e each other’s expertise  through 
20 regional value chains and to benefit from economies of scale and scope afforded by a single to 
integrated market.  This enables  Africa to be a far more competitive global player. Digitalisation is at 
the core of enabling th is trade, and to facilit ating its economic and welfare gains. African countries 
have come together to integrate their markets and move towards a d igital single market under the 
AfCFTA. The primary strategy of the continent’s Digital Transformation Strategy  for Africa  is the 
Digi tal Single Market, which has a target of being achieved by 2030. The aim of the strategy is to 
develop common standards an d a data protection framework that simultaneously aligns with 
domestic country contexts, regional requirements , and global standards.  
This will require significant harmonisation and domestication of the African Union Data Policy 
Framework which sets out a common vision, principles, strategic priorities and key 
recommendations to guide Member States in developing a nd integrating their nat ional data systems 
and capabilities. This is so they can  derive value from data that is being generated by  citizens, 
gov ernment entities and industries. Currently, this data is appropriated by large multinational 
corporations, glo bal monopoly platforms, and companies experimenting on or with data -driven 
technologies -sometimes as part of solutions for the public sector or h umanitarian agencies, which is 
then commercialised for sale and profit extraction. Implementation and harmonis ation of data policy 
(personal and non -personal), underpinned by a coherent governance approach which allows for the 
development of integrated dat a systems, is critical to optimise information flows and productivity 
gains from digitalisation and dataficati on on and for the contin ent.  It is also important to support 
local companies, authorities and civil society initiatives so that they can provide solutions and 
expertise.   
To unlock the value of digital trade for the benefit of all, there is a need to des ign inclusive global 
digital trade and data policies that work for all Africans and in particular the most vulnerable. This 
involves having more i nclusive multistakeholder engagements that enable open and transparent 
dialogue on how to regulate and govern digital trade so that ev eryone can realise the value of their 
data. There is also a need for concerted efforts to ensure that digital trade under the AfCFTA is just 
and equitable for all Africans, including informal traders and marginalised groups, who are  often left 
vulnerable a nd unprotected.  
4.3.2 . Labour  
The digital economy, particularly location -based platforms, could potentially provide alter native 
forms of work to alleviate mass unemployment in many countries across the continent. Digital 
platforms can offer opportunities to people who face unequal access to income -generating 
opportunities or endure systemic barriers to entry in traditional l abour markets (Ahmed et al, 2021). 
There is evidence that the presence of global digital platforms can benefit  developing countries by  
providing access to new technology, jobs, or skills. Conversely, these platforms also give rise to 
factors that may ampli fy discrimination, resulting in job losses or declining  incomes and inequitable 
outcomes in traditional labou r markets. It is importa nt to highlight that precarious working 
conditions characterise workers on these platforms (those who deliver the services ) and that the 
workers operate outside of official employee -employer relationships and are therefore unprotect ed 
by labour law. ILO For instance argues that the type of labour relations mediated by digital platforms 
spawn working arrangements that do not guarantee fundamental wo rker rights such as paid leave, 
21 retirement, safety, and the right to be paid fairly for one’s contribution. Furthermore, w orkers whose 
work is mediated through these platforms face overlapping challenges , such as an unfair bias against 
women, labour supply exceeding demand, limited social protection , and income volatility. As we 
have  highlighted, this leads to a rise in corporate power and market concentration, and erosion of 
labour bargaining power —which make it dif ficult for parties involved in these ecosystems to reap 
equitable gains from the growth of digital platforms i n the locations where th ey operate and earn 
profits. Moreover, there is growing evidence  that employment in the on -demand or gig economy can 
replicate offline patterns of lab our exploitation , particularly for lower -skilled individuals  who manage 
to find (inferior quality  and low -paying) work online. Similarly, the engagement of low -paid workers 
in the Global South for the purposes of conten t moderation and data -cleaning is an issue that calls 
out for global policy attention.  
4.3.3 . Taxes  
Global digital platforms operatin g in developing countries may also evade taxes, as well as be non -
compliant with national regulations. Historically, globa l processes of digitalisation and datafication 
have been seen as a threat to the often -marginal t ax bases that exist in developing cou ntries. Tax -
base erosion due to profit -shifting by digital platforms has been estimated  to cost developing 
countries over USD 500 billion annuall y. This points to the need to fix outdated tax systems, whilst 
ensuring fair competition between multinationals and nation al businesses and that local start -ups 
and smaller -scale initiatives are not obstructed.  
The inc rease in the use of excise taxes on s ocial media and mobile apps further highlights poor tax 
administrative capability in developing countries (Matheson and Pe tit 2017). Some countries in Africa 
for instance (e.g., Cameroon, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia) ha ve put in place laws that impose 
regr essive daily use taxes on Over The Top (OTT) services such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and 
LinkedIn, as well as on in stant messaging apps like WhatsApp, Snapchat, and Skype. They often 
implement these taxes without  a comprehensive assessment of the lo ng-term economic impact or an 
empirical evidence base. Once introduced, they are seldom repealed. The procedure of calculating 
these taxes  is usually opaque, does not inv olve a public consultation process, and is justified by a 
misguided understanding of the role of OTTs in the Internet valu e chain.  
Not only do these  impacts negatively  on connectivity and affordability of mobile services, especially 
for those with pre -existing inequalities who already face connectivity barriers, but also has a negative  
impact  on all segments of the Internet value chain, which  hinders broader economic advantages and 
digital development opportunities associat ed with ICTs . Our  research  shows that these excise duties 
also have implications on the right to freedom of ex pression and access to information, which are 
increasingly best exercised online. These taxes impact affordability and meaningful access to the 
Internet, especially for the marginalised and poor. Ultimately poorly designed digital taxes have 
actually lower ed domestic tax revenue and reduced Internet use, as evidenced  in particular  in 
Uganda . 
Regarding  taxation, regulations should be crafted that address the abuses and monopoly or 
oligopoly that is currently evidenced in labour markets. To mitigate the negative impact of social 
media taxes,  regulations that enable ICTs to be levera ged for sustainable e conomic growth and 
22 social inclusion should be introduced. Should taxes be imposed, the proc ess of their formulation 
should be transparent, broad -based, and subject to a rigorous economic impact assessment.    
4.3.4 . Social protection  
The digitalisation of the economy offers opportunities for the collection of much -needed tax by the 
state as well  as the ability to deal with challenges associated with enforcement through the visibility 
of firms and workers. This creates more feasible tax bases for the social protection of currently 
unprotected informal workers online and offline, and for more gener al social investment and 
welfare. Social welfare interventions were relied upon extensively in Africa during the COVID -19 
pandemic, as governmen ts turned to digital cash transfers as a preferred tool to protect the poor and 
vulnerable from the socioeconomi c impacts of the pandemic. In South Africa for instance, 18% of 
households received the government’s COVID -19 relief. Of these grant recipients,  70% were able to 
receive grants through digital channels. The percentage of the population that received grants  
digitally was much lower in Nigeria at 3%, where only 32% of households were eligible to receive 
grants through digital channels.  
As a result o f lockdown policies t hat were instituted across the continent in relation to social 
protection, there is the pot ential to make regulations to support digitally enabled innovations for the 
intake and registration of beneficiaries, assessment of needs and co nditions, and provisi on of 
benefits. Digital transformation on the continent therefore offers an unprecedented o pportunity to 
address eligibility and barriers to formalisation faced by informal individuals and firms if the benefits 
of doing so are evident eg. business disaster  relief,  online training,  online financing, micro  business 
procurement by governments  
4.3.5. Recommendations  
Regulation should target the negative labour market distortions that digital platforms can generate. 
However, addressing th e complex adaptive gl obal nature of platform work requires an ecosystem 
approach. This means that all stakeholde rs who are part of the location -based platform ecosystem 
(platforms, regulators, the government, platform workers and trade unions, and consumer s) should 
be consulte d to craft policies that create the fair working conditions needed to promote both gender 
equity and economic justice for platform workers.  They should gear this regulation toward 
rebalancing bargaining power, extending certain labour  rights and protectio ns, and reshaping social 
protection provisions.  
In light of this, the following recommenda tions are made:  
▪ Pay attention to the knowledge lag: The evolving nature of the ICT landscape needs to be 
better understood. A number of traditio nal business and netw ork models, regulatory 
frameworks and infrastructure investments in the African ICT landsca pe are critically out of 
sync with the fast pace of new ICT developments. Policy makers should keep abreast with 
these dynamics and develop loca lised solutions that ensure that fiscal measures do not 
contradict digital development strategies with long -term  economic and social inclusion 
implications.  
23 ▪ Address structural constraints:  Address the key structural constraints that inhibit online 
labour rights, gender equality and inclusive social protection. Concerted efforts are needed 
to ensure the intervention s that are designed to strengthen economic justice in the digital 
economy sim ultaneously facilitate a policy and regulatory environment which is  fit for 
purpose and contextually relevant to address existing labour market inefficiencies that are 
exacerbated  by location -based platformisation.  
▪ Recognise jurisdictional challenges:  Ackn owledge the jurisdictional challenges of 
enforcement when digital p latforms do not have any physical presence in the country, 
governments should cooperate to ensure that (multinat ional) location -based platforms 
provide a minimum set of protections to their  workers, such as facilitating working 
conditions that align with e xisting relevant national labour regulations.  
▪ Create trusted working conditions: Compel location -based digital platforms through global 
governance to provide more transparent and innovativ e communication strategies and 
algorithms to facilitate robust and trusted working conditions.  
▪ Align fiscal and tax regimes:  Align national and regional fiscal and taxation regime s with 
efforts to mitigate against Base Erosion and Profit shifting (BEPs) to  effectively tax digital 
platforms.  
▪ Enable better distribution of tax between countries: Foster cooperation for the 
distribution of taxes between countries. Leaving it to states to facilitate these agreements 
can contribute to further imbalances across th e continent, as disparities will emerge from 
current patterns of co llaborations where weaker countries are left out.  
▪ Support multistakeholder engagement: Create ongoing, inclusive  multistakeholder 
engagements that allow an open and transparent dialogue on how to improve digital trade 
so that everyone can realise the value  of their data towards a public good, with due 
protections and benefits.  
 
4.4. Data governance and realising dat a justice  
Data has, over a relatively short period, emerged as a de fining force of social organisation and of 
global capitalism which can be ha rnessed to influence and govern almost every aspect of our day -to-
day lives.  While progressive concept ions of data governance are emerging in Europe, legal and 
institutional respo nses have for the most part drawn on a narrow conception of data rights at t he 
individual level, focusing chiefly on personal data protection and privacy. Even so,  personal data 
remains almost completely unregulated in many parts of the world, as does non -personal data. Yet, 
when accumulated at scale, data confers almost unimagin able power to extract value and govern 
peoples’ lives.  
Without regulation and other interventions, dat a has become a site of injustice — exacerbating 
inequality and marginalisation . Regulation at national and supra -national levels attempts to tackle 
some o f these harms. However, in addition to the narrow focus on personal data and individual 
24 rights, regulat ion has been formulated in a broad and general way, overlooking contextual 
specificities and not providing sufficiently  focused implementation, accounta bility and enforcement 
frameworks.  
These measures largely fail to respond to the potential harms of dat afication which take place at the 
collective level, as well as the role of da ta as a resource and a means of production which confers 
enormous economic p ower when accumulated in large volumes. To address this gap, policy 
approaches are needed to govern dat a in the collective interest or for common good. These must be 
guided by over arching principles of equity and justice; however, as Parminder Singh and An ita 
Gurumurthy from IT for Change contend, these principles  must also be responsive to local and 
conte xtual differences in how datafication is   experienced.  
To advance this goal,  RIA participated in developing the African Union Data Policy Framework to 
provide an Africa -centric data justice -focused governance structure for the burgeoning data 
environment across the continent. Building on the theoretical framework of both economic and data 
justice, we argue for a strong incorporation of these concepts into  the GDC. Considering the 
limitations of comparable data governance frameworks, the example of the Afri can Union developing 
a data policy framework that  incorporates data justice,  despite inadequate public participation in 
the African Commission and Membe r State adoption processes,  is an example of how these 
important  principles can be incorporated  into  a high -level compact.  
Box 3. The African Union Data Policy Framework  
Africa’ s data traffic is growing at an annual rate of 41%, an indication of the ris ing adoption and use of 
digital platforms in the region. To harness the data -driven economic gains gene rated by these 
platforms, a number of countries are implementing unilateral m echanisms to include services tax and 
equalisation levies that are applied t o specific sectors such as the telecommunication industry, mobile 
money transactions, and OTT technolog ies. 
Finalised in 2022, the African Union Data Policy Framework provides a mo re cohesive framework for 
African countries to partake in the myriad benefit s afforded by data produced within the continent. It is 
centred on “creating a consolidated data enviro nment and harmonised digital governance systems that 
enable the free and secu re flow of data across the continent while safeguarding human rights, 
uphold ing security, and ensuring equitable access and sharing of benefits”. Additionally, the framework 
focus es on positioning African countries to harness data to “empower businesses an d institutions, 
boost intra -Africa regional trade, and contribute to economi c integration efforts”. Among the key pillars 
denoted in the framework for the data ecosystem in Africa  is data justice. The framework recommends 
the following actions by states in  the African Union:  
▪ Safeguarding of human rights in the digital environment  through the rule of law ;  
▪ Ensuring institutional arrangements and regulations are established only through inclusive, 
consultative and transparent processes , and  
25 ▪ Ensuring institutions responsible for overseeing the use of data, as well as public and priva te 
data producers, are accountable for the use of public and personal data to those whose data i s 
used .  
 
4.4.1 . Data governance  
At the heart of data governance is instilling trust  in the use of data as a pre -condition for fully 
realising the gains of digital tr ansformation . In response, many have called for “data governance” 
approaches to enable institutional and regulatory structures to govern data in line with nor mat ive 
frames that assume : 
• democratic and rights frameworks,  
• institutional endowments to govern effectively, and  
• levels of human development that allow citizens to exercise their rights and freedoms.                                                                    
However , these conditions do not pertain in many countries toward which the SDGs are specifically 
dire cted and there is now considerable evidence that regulatory governance approaches premised 
on these assumptions that work in the Gl obal North do  not always apply in the Global South. As 
Linnet Taylor  has argued, not only are such approaches sometimes in sufficient to create the 
conditions for truly beneficial data and AI in the Global South , but they also fail to account or pr epare 
for the reality of contextual developmental demands – along with the risks that are introduced by the 
increasing production o f digital traces, shadows and selves.  
Any examination of the data realities into which AI is being introduced requires a wid er political 
economy assessment with consideration of the global and domestic power relations, interests and 
imbalances that determ ine technological developments. Technological advancements, especially 
when coupled with  large -scale crises like COVID -19, ha ve highlighted some of the practical 
considerations for data governance in the public interest and some of the normative tensions i n the 
treatment of private, community, and collective information that have clear implic ations for AI.  
Currently, control of data is  concentrated amongst a small number of platforms primarily in the US 
and China. In Africa, private actors such as telecoms  companies along with banks, direct messaging 
services, satellite operators, the retail sector, and mines, etc. have become m ajor holders of data. 
States have been lagging in their role to gather, process, utilise and avail data to external 
stakeholders, a lthough the number of African countries with Right to Information laws has increased 
from just five in 2009 to 30 in 2023 acc ording to UNESCO. This underscores the need for economic 
regulation to enable greater access to and control over the resources of d ata and AI, and the 
capabilities and infrastructure required to utilise them, for more e ven redistribution of opportunities 
and benefits within and between countries.  
Furthermore, data collection and data -driven systems are already exacerbating social, an d economic 
inequalities, as they amplify bias, marginalisation and discrimination agains t vulnerable or 
disadvantaged groups (such as women). This demonstrates the need for rights such as equal 
representation in data, non -discrimination, and the protection  of group identities and indigenous 
26 knowledge systems. Some practices, such as the use o f biometric data for predicting procl ivity for 
crime, are inherently unjust, cannot be resolved through improving technology and must never be 
permitted.   
4.4.2. Data justice             
The concept of data justice has emerged in response to these critical  concerns. It has been advanced 
by a global community of researchers  and activists  such as Taylor   as a way to talk about and 
challenge the complex, overlapping harms of datafication at multiple s cales – personal, local, and 
global . There is also  research  beginning to link data justice to economic fairness and rights  and to 
create comprehensive frameworks for what ec onomic justice and a fair distribution of benefits might 
look like in a datafied society. Data justice requires that data are not used to sus tain or compound 
existing inequalities or undermine autonomy, that those from whom data originates share in the 
eco nomic and social value rea lised from data, and that there is an equitable distribution of 
opportunities arising from data. The very conceptio n of what constitutes data, as a meaningful set of 
signals that can be processed, needs attention. Definitions of d ata can impact adversely o n issues 
like the need for limits on bulk surveillance, facial recognition, gait recognition, and gender.  
Expansive  approaches are needed to govern data in the collective interest, or for the common good, 
while still protecting in dividual privacy. Recognis ing the validity of communal ownership of data and 
the impact of data use on communities, data justice requires pro tection of collective rights in data, 
equitable access to economic gain from collective data, and community protect ion from harms, such 
as bi as and discrimination, caused by data. It also demands attention to how digital infrastructure is 
owned and control led by the northern hemisphere which, in turn, determines where data, power and 
capital will be concentrated. The a dvancement of AI and data have shown the economic power 
derived by online platforms which extract data from users , converting such data into “digital 
intelligence” that enables them to develop new products and services and increase efficiency in their 
profit -output operation, to the detriment of users who gain little or no economic valu e despite being 
the producers of this data. Also significant is the training of AI on data that is copyright protec ted, 
such as data behind media paywalls, and where data is scraped from public sources without 
permission. The risk  for Africa is that the co stly production of data may benefit AI applications which 
contribute nothing to the generation of the data  resourc es on which they rely.  The ambiguous issue 
of AI operators taking advantage of data stored in cloud services, or g athered under auspices suc h as 
analytic or cybersecurity services, needs attention.  
The  Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI)   data and econo mic justice primers  raise  
concerns about the increasing power of a few digital monopolies over  digital infrastructure. The 
African Union Da ta Policy Framework also notes the Global North/South imbalance in the 
distribution of platform owners and their ta x jurisdictions. This imba lance is enabled by the lack of a 
framework on moral and legal principles  of economic justice.  Consequently, in an ticipation of the 
future development of the digital commons as a global public good, and as elaborated in GPAI  data 
and economic justice  primers on which we  collaborated,  as well as  in line with the collaboration 
with IT For Change on a  feminist digital economy ,  we  support four rights -based principles for data -
related economic justice. These are:  
27 ▪ the right to benefit from one’s data, and avoi d economic harm;  
▪ the righ t to access one’s data, including for third parties of choice;  
▪ the right to appropriate represe ntation in data, including the right to invisibility and 
remaining absent, and;  
▪ the right to participate in the governance of data, and  in the relevant economic  systems 
based on data.  
In addition, economic data rights should be recognised for data ge nerators and data workers, who 
can use their collective rights to port aggregated data to a data commons or alternative data 
infrastru cture. This could foster competi tive data -based services that could serve  collectives much 
better than data monopol ies do. Rights alone do not ensure economic justice, however, they should 
be instilled in relevant laws, regulations, policies, and im plementation mechanisms, to enable 
equi table and just economic outcomes.  
4.4.3. Recommendations  
Key policy recommendations  coalesce around localising and contextualising data rights and 
protections; ensuring affected communities can participate meaningfull y in data governance; and 
guarding agai nst the extraction and concentration of data as a resource and means of production.  
The following high -level policy recommendations are applicable at different levels of government, as 
well as in non -government and pr ivate sector settings. Within specific country and regional contexts 
and through the participatory processes intrinsic to democratic policy formulation, more detailed 
guidelines for achieving data justice can be developed.  
▪ Ensure data governance and regula tion uphold rights, including economic rights and workers 
rights such as the right to port their work -related data to othe r platforms, and appropriate 
frameworks for redress that bind transnational corporations.  
▪ Contextualise and localise data rules throug h the democratic participation of affec ted 
communities and enabling alternative forms of data stewardship.  
▪ Enable benefici al data flow by preventing anti -competitive data practices , ensuring equitable 
access to resources, and enabling inte roperability.  
▪ Reconcile the claims of data sovereignty a nd global governance through international 
solidarity committed to  data justice including redress of inequality and marginalisation.  
4.5. Disinformation and information disorders  
4.5.1. Information d isorders in Africa  
Reflecting some of the challenges at the global level, laws tackling information disorders in the 
conti nent tend to be ambiguous, with the potential of politicising the concept and criminalising 
speech in efforts to control narratives. A s with other regions in the globe, elements of informati on 
disorders, such as disinformation and hate speech, manifest hea vily during elections and conflicts. 
This has had serious implications in the exercise of democratic rights, freedom of expression and  
28 rights to political representation by structurally marg inalised groups. Ideally, platform companies 
should collaborate wi th local authorities and stakeholders to deal with these challenges. The 
safeguarding of citizens’ fundamental human rights, as well t heir civic rights is not something that 
can be left to t he discretion of providers of public services with the potential t o cause significant 
harm. In the same way that international air transportation networks, whether private or public,  are 
regulated to  guarantee passenger safety, global communications netwo rks need to conform to 
universal democratic rights of privacy, access to information and freedom of expression.  
While states in Africa have deficient regulations to properly address and account f or the information 
disorders produced largely online, these systems of criminalisation  are likely to prove even less 
effective through the likelihood of an increase in AI -generated false content,  with its potential 
disruption to economies and political processes.  Simultaneously, efforts by platforms to deal with 
the magnitude of the problem through automation of the identification and rem oval of fake or 
harmful information through the use of opaqu e algorithms, the train ing of which happens through 
the manual identification of harmful content by people employed under questionable labour 
standards by platforms, are not only inadequate but po tentially harmful themselves.  Because the 
staff of these gl obal social media platf orm companies are spread too thin across the continent to 
offer contextualised solutions to information disorders, policies tackling information disorders, and 
consequently content moderation through algorithms are done from the pers pectives of the Global 
North. Contributing to this challenge is the dearth of knowledge from the Global South. Studies on 
information disorders remain dominated by theoretical paradigms, examples,  and case studies 
drawn from relatively recent experiences i n Global North contexts . 
4.5.2. Disinformation and content regulation  
The proliferation of online hate speech and disinformation has serious implications for human rights, 
trust and safety, not least in African countries. “Information operations” around th e continent aimed 
at covertly swaying elections have been widely exposed, while violence has been incited against 
ethnic groups and migrants in a number of conflict cases. A RIA study  has detailed range  of other 
problems with the  integrity of Africa’s information environment s.   
In another  RIA report , commissioned by UNESCO, we have addressed platform regulation challen ges 
that have significant negative bearing on Africa.  These highlight the discriminatory application of 
platform regulation policies by major platform operators:  
▪ platforms  are slow to respond to emergencies that result in serious human rights violations, 
and  
▪ they have failed to invest in African languages for moderation and, consequently, to provide 
linguistic contexts for content removal.  
Findings by RIA are that the key f actors accounting for the proliferation of disinformation and hate 
speec h online are:  
▪  ‘attention economics’;  
▪  automated advertising systems;  
29 ▪  external manipulators;   
▪  company spending priorities;  
▪  stakeholder knowledge deficits, and  
●  flaw s in platforms’ policies and in their implementation.  
The research also finds that how platforms under stand and identify harms is insufficiently mapped to 
human rights standards, and there is a gap in how generic policy elements should deal with loca l 
cases, different rights, and business models when there are tensions.  
In the absence of companies having c lear elaboration of how their policies operate at global and 
local levels, it is to be expected that there will be many international inconsistencie s in application. 
The GDC needs to account for the range of interactions and applicability of regulations bo th on 
global and local levels. Platform regulation should emphasise the value of clarity and transparency 
regarding application on both global and l ocal levels – of platforms and of their different internal 
policies.  
Also important to consider is how platf orms’ own policies on content regulation are generally 
overshadowed by content curation algorithms that support the core business aims to collect da ta 
and sell advertising.   
Further, platforms’ policies are not always transparent and that they do not prov ide adequate risk 
assessment.  Policies that are shaped in this way, and in secrecy, work against the human right to 
equality.  
Challenges around tra nspar ency are presented in two ways: opacity in terms of lack of consistency in 
how policies are applied – for example, Google  transparency reports  on political advertising during 
the elections still misses data from the African continent – and opacity in how AI -based content 
moderation works.  
Enforcement by platforms of their own  term s of service has grave shortfalls, while attempts to 
improve outcomes by automating moderation have the ir limits. These inequalities in policy and 
practice abound in relation to different categories of people, countries and languages, while 
technology  adva nces are raising even more challenges.    
In this light, this submission suggests that the GDC advises that regulatory arrangements should 
include the interplay between platforms’ policy rules, practices, business models and technology. At 
the same ti me, t he failures of ‘solo -governing’ by platforms in content curation and moderation, 
should not lead to ‘so lo-state regulation’ as the governmental response. There are  many examples in  
Africa  of inappropriate regulatory responses to developments on platforms, in particular Internet 
shut -downs and criminalisation of content under vague  terms such as “false news” or “fake news”. 
What speech and narratives get to be or not be accepted onl ine should not be left to social media 
platforms, or one stakeholder to decide and regulate.  
Accordingly, the GDC should encourage hybrid regulatory  arra ngements that include multi -
stakeholder participation in the making of rules for and by platforms. The specifics may vary 
according to the issues at hand (e.g., elections, child protection, public health), but there should be 
30 cross -cutting requirement s for  transparency reporting, access to platform data, and conducting 
human rights impact assessments.  
In the light of our research, this submission suggests that the GDC advises that any evolving 
regulatory arrangements include the interplay between and withi n platforms’ internal rules, 
practices, business models and technology.  
4.5.3. Recommendations  
Tackling  disinformation and hate speech online can best be done on a modular basis as befits 
differing issues, regulatory arrangements and capacities, and b y ens uring that the array of statutory 
regulators is structurally independent of political interventions. To  address disinformation and hate 
speech online:  
▪ The GDC should highlight human rights and sustainable development as agreed international 
standards that are foundational for all regulatory arrangements everywhere.  
▪ Statutory authorities should not seek to t ake over the formulation of platforms’ content 
policies nor the moderation work by the companies. Instead, they should requi re companies 
to meet their ow n consumer terms of service to the full, as well as to follow broader 
objectives, policy standards and process benchmarks.  
▪ These principles can apply to solo -, self - and co -regulatory mechanisms, as well as be 
institutionalised  in multistakeholder roles at  all levels of rule -making, enforcement, 
monitoring, oversight and review.  
▪ It can be strongly encourage d that platforms elaborate how they  balance global and local 
dimensions of their terms of use, and provide more equitable ( and auditable) resourcing for  
monitoring and moderation of content in the Global South..  
▪ Tackling disinformation and hate speech onl ine can best be done by  combining various 
regulatory arrangements into a hybrid overall system including the legal delegati on of roles 
to platforms, eff ective codes of conduct, ensuring statutory regulators are structurally 
independent from political inte rventions, and institutionalising multistakeholder 
involvement throughout.  
▪ Media, NGOs, tech employee bodies, whistle -blower s and researchers should be s upported 
as positive elements in the wider governance ecosystem in which regulatory arrangements 
take p lace.  
▪ Responses to hate speech and disinformation should build stakeholder knowledge through 
media and information literacy,  and support for de -centralis ed platforms.  
4.6. Harnessing AI for Africa  
The development and use of AI in Africa should support, ra ther than hinder, socio -economic justice 
and poverty alleviation, and not impact negatively on the enjoyment and realisation of all human 
rights. Yet, th e foreign global monopolies that dominate the  AI market in the region are based on 
systems developed ou tside Africa and primarily trained with foreign data, thus limiting their capacity 
31 to address the region’s priorities. Even worse, these foreign -trained models may have serious 
implications for huma n rights through models that are discriminatory  or simply   inappropriate for 
local contexts.  
As AI rapidly proliferates on the African continent, it is essential to assess  which regulation exists and 
identify  what new regulatory regimes are required to address the risks and guide the application of AI 
for publ ic good.  RIA’s analysis of the dynam ics of AI use and regulatory environment across the 
education, health and well -being, labour, climate change and env ironmental sustainability sectors in 
Southern Africa indicates that significant efforts are required to  ensure AI project leaders understand  
and take into account the potential and ethical and human rights -related implications of their 
products and project s. Further, the majority of AI use in the region  is by privately -owned companies, 
suggesting the need for efforts to support public sector capabilities. Uses also fall mostly into the 
labour policy arena, indicating a need for the prioritisation of polici es and programmes that address 
future -of-work scenarios such as reskilling and labour transitions.  
Tho ugh some African countries, such as M auritius, Egypt, Rwanda, Ghana, South Africa and Tunisia, 
have developed or are considering developing AI strategies , a majority of them do not have national 
AI policies or strategies in place. Cooperation between count ries and regional bodies, and between  
countries and tech companies should be encouraged to increase the capacities of local authorities to 
effect these p olicies for the protection of fundamental  rights and freedoms, as well as for the 
promotion of AI depl oyment in the region. Rapid developme nt in AI capabilities without an adequate 
legal and regulatory framework threatens to upend the livelihoods and righ ts. 
4.6.1. Data governance towards innovation of AI in Africa  
One of the challenges limiting the democr atisation of AI and its deployment in  the region by local 
providers for local solutions, is the domination of both global and national tech monopolies wh o 
have amassed huge control and power through massive data collection and infrastructure 
ownership. A l ot of local solutions are bought by t hese companies because of their financial might.  
Another challenge is that African governments lack open data initia tives that can be leveraged for AI 
development. In countries where these initiatives have been set up, they have been unsustainable as 
the s ystems are not fed with data. Globally, the continent has the least statistical capacity . The lack 
of data deeply en trenches inequality and harms caused by AI due to lack of (local) data on 
marginalised and underreprese nted groups that can be used to avert  these harms.  Contributing to 
this challenge is the low affordability of ownership and use of digital devices and n etworks. As 
Africans miss out on the opportunity to use these technologies, they also miss out on the 
opportunities to create a digital foot print, which is needed as raw material for AI.  
4.6.2. AI and biometric identification  
The application of AI in the area of biometric  identification can make citizens more vulnerable in the 
online space. AI -driven digit al ID systems are rapidly being adopt ed by countries in Africa. These 
systems entail the use of biometric data such as fingerprints, iris scans, and faci al images for 
authentication in access to services. The rationale behind the adoption of these systems is to 
increase efficiency in provisio n of government services and to protect citizens against identity theft. 
32 However, these systems are susceptible to c ybersecurity attacks and third -party sharing of data that 
leaves citizens vulnerable  to data breaches. We are currently  working on this project on Digital IDs in 
Africa.  
4.6.3. AI and labour in A frica  
It is important that the whole AI lifecycle respects human rights, human decency and autonomy. 
Africa contributes significantly to the global AI su pply chain: including as suppliers of raw materials  
for technology, producers of data, human content mo deration supplementing alg orithm -based 
moderation, cleaners of data sets, and agents feeding machines with content for machine learning. 
However, the current practices of combating information disorders through algorithmic as well as 
human content moderati on are characterised by  global hierarchi es of exploitatio n. The inequalities 
in the distribution of labour exist  both in the employment of human intervention to moderate 
content on social media platforms and the back -door labour of training AI to identify elements of 
information disorders. Both need to be seen  as work that is distri buted to lower income countries 
seemingly requiring little or no skills. Unfortunately, this makes the workers easil y replaceable and 
leaves them with limited bargaining power and social protection. Therefore, platform regulations 
need to account for globa l hierarchies where workers situated in the Global South are doing work for 
users based in the Global North.  
4.6.4. Recommendations  
Given the above, the following policy recommendations can be made to create an enabling 
environment for AI in Africa:  
▪ Infrastructure development: Governments should prioritise developing policies that ensure 
safe, secure, and inclusive in frastructure for the development of AI systems. The policies 
should also include means of fostering open data (which is very crucial for the development 
of AI systems), connectivity and Internet access, and good governance for the development 
and sustenanc e of AI systems .  
▪ Building local capaci ty and skills: Skills development is at the heart of advancement and 
responsible use of AI in Africa. Policies should be formulated to prom ote understanding  
around AI at all levels,  and  promote uptake of STEM by women and underserved groups. 
Policy makers must also be supported to understand the risks of AI, and women should be 
central in AI -related decision -making positions.  
▪ Taking a gender  and intersection al sensitive approach to address current inequalities: 
Expand gender -sensitive information and data collection for the broader ICT sector to inform 
policies that can advance and ensure the active leadership and involvement of women in 
digi tal and AI servic es. Standards around data quality and representation are essential to 
eradicating discrimination aga inst women, and other underserved groups, that occur in AI 
systems trained on bias and unrepresentative, or under -representative, datasets.    
▪ Advancing Afri can -centred value systems in AI ethics: It is essential to address ethical 
concerns surrounding AI d eployment. Governments, industry players, and other stakeholders 
33 should play a key role in creating regulatory and policy frameworks centre d in African valu es 
and principles.  
▪ International development assistance: In advancing development of responsible AI 
solutions in Africa, actors including donors, intergovernmental organisations and other 
funders should focus on supporting infrastructure d evelopment to ens ure inclusive AI for its 
long -term development. In doing this, focus should also be placed on “ensur ing African 
states retain their sovereignty in developing AI governance solutions”  that are rooted in 
national values . 
▪ Collaboration and knowledge sharing : There is a need for co llaboration and knowledge -
sharing among countries and regions to promote the global deployment of AI for public value 
creation. African cou ntries can benefi t from partnerships with more advanced economies to 
enable them to leapfrog development stages and a ccelerate AI adoption.  
▪ Accountability for risk : A governance framework for AI in which the handful of corporations 
driving rapid AI develop ment are required to account to public authorities for the current and 
future risks presented by the technologies tha t they are developing and are required both to  
manage risk and to maintain international trust.  
  
34 Annex 1. Summary of recommendations  
Crit ical Themes  Summary recommendations  
Public data to 
address alternative 
access strategies  ● Produce better data:  Nation ally representative individual -level data on ICT 
access and use is critical for evidence -based policy making. Without this, 
national indica tors and assessments of consumer needs will always be biassed 
towards more developed countries and towards tho se who have already been 
integrated into the digital economy.  
● Establish a digital solidarity fund:  As a single key recommendation for the 
creation  of global digital data as a public good, it is proposed that there is a 1% 
contribution from the  Domain Name  System  (DNS)  registration  fees  of all 
countries globally towards a digital solidarity fund.  
● End siloed ICT policies : Develop evidence -based tr ansversal digital strategies 
focused on  human development, that foster more equitable social and 
economic inclusion,  and which include  rights -preserving regulatory 
arrangements needed to redress intersectional inequalities reflected in the 
uneven impacts  of digital developments.  
Connectivity, 
access pricing and 
quality  ● Innovative regulatory approach es:  There is a nee d to develop regulatory 
approaches to increasing connectivity through non -traditional connectivity 
providers such as small operators and co mmunity networks.  
● Spectrum : New approaches in spectrum assignment should take into account 
recent  innovations that e nable dynamic spectrum access and spectrum 
sharing and:  
- Develop administrative incentives to encourage licence holders to 
relinquish spectr um that is not in use (“use it or share it”). Give 
operators spectrum auction price or  tax rebate s on 5G spectrum 
licences for sharing their currently assigned spectrum.  
- Use or lose:  withdraw spectrum from operators who do not use the 
spectrum in their w hole concession or licence area.  
- Create  regulatory enabled  business models where small operators 
help incumbents ac hieve universal service obligations.  
- Allocate spectrum that may not  have value for operators, but will have 
a significant impact for small operators and community networks such 
as unutilised spectrum in rural and remote areas.  
35 - Introduce simplified licence exemptions or licensing with low 
transaction costs for small operat ors and community networks.  
- Provide incentives for serving  rural, remot e, or underserved areas.  
- Revise spectrum fees to incentivise a more efficient use of the 
spectrum, as is being done i n the United States with the CBRS.  
● Harmonise regional regulation  to create economies of scale and scope for 
investment, and to create effe ctively regulated competitive markets.   
● Remedy wholesale access in the data market  by reducing anti -competitive 
prac tices in the data markets in Africa that exclude competitive entry by new 
players, particularly in relation to costs of roaming and facilit ies leasing.  
● Remove  social media and mobile money excise taxes  which counter 
affordable access strategies and impac t negatively on the welfare of people. 
Also remove excise duties on  low -end smartphones.  
E- Trade, labour, 
taxation and social 
protection  ● Pay attention to the knowledge lag: Policy makers should keep abreast with 
the fast -changing technologies and regulat ory environments and develop 
localised solutions that ensure that fiscal measures do not contradict digital 
development strategies with lon g-term economic and social inclusion  
implications.  
● Address structural constraints:  Concerted efforts are needed to e nsure the 
interventions that are designed to strengthen economic justice in the digital 
economy simultaneously facilitate a policy and regu latory environment which 
is fit for purpose and contextually relevant to address existing labour market 
inefficiencie s that are exacerbated by location -based platformisation.  
● Create trusted working conditions: Compel location -based digital platforms 
throug h global governance to provide more transparent and innovative 
communication strategies and algorithms to facilitate robust and trusted 
working conditions.  
● Align fiscal and tax regimes:  Align national and regional fiscal and taxation 
regimes with efforts t o mitigate against Base Erosion and Profit shifting (BEPs) 
to effectively tax digital platforms.  
● Enable better distr ibution of tax between countries: Foster cooperation for 
the distribution of taxes between countries. Leaving it to states to facilitate 
these agreements can contribute to fur ther imbalances across the continent, 
as disparities will emerge from current pat terns of collaborations where 
weaker countries are left out.  
36  
Data governance 
and realising data 
justice in Africa  ● Ensure data governance and regulation uphold rights , including economic 
rights and workers rights such as the right to port their work relat ed data to 
other platforms, and appropriate frameworks for redress that bind 
transnational corporations.  
● Contextualise and localise data ru les through democratic parti cipation of 
affected communities and enabling alternative forms of data stewardship.  
● Enab le beneficial data flow  through preventing anti -competitive data 
practises, ensuring equitable access to resources, and enabling 
interopera bility.  
● Reconcile the claims  of data sovereignty and global governance through 
international solidarity committed to data justice  including redress of 
inequality and marginalisation.  
Disinformation and 
information 
disorders  ● The GDC should highlight human  rights and sustainable development as 
agreed international standards  that are foundational for all regulatory 
arrang ements everywhere.  
● Statutory authorities should not seek to take over the formulation of 
platforms’ content policies nor the moderation wor k by the com panies . 
Instead, they should require companies to meet their own consumer terms of 
service to the full, a s well as to follow broader objectives, policy standards and 
process benchmarks.  
● Tackling disinformation and hate speech online can best be  done by  
combining various regulatory arrangements into a hybrid overall system 
including legal delegation of roles to platforms, effective codes of conduct, 
ensuring statutory regulators are structurally independent from political 
interventions, and inst itutionalisi ng multi -stakeholder involvement 
throughout.  
● The roles of media, NGOs, tech employee bodies, whistle -blow ers and 
researchers should be supported as positive elements in the wider 
governance ecosystem in which regulatory arrangements take place.  
 
Harnessing AI for 
Africa  ● Infrastructure development: Governments should prioritise developing 
policies that ensure  “safe, secure, and inclusive” infrastructure for the 
development of AI systems. The policies should also include means of fostering 
37 open d ata (which is very crucial for the development of AI systems), 
connectivity and internet access, and “ good governance ” for the development 
and sustenance of AI systems .  
● Building  local capacity and skills: Skill development is at the heart of 
advancement and responsible use of AI in Africa. Pol icies should be formulated 
to “ promote understanding around AI at all levels”, and  promote uptake of 
STEM by women and underserved groups. Policy -makers must also be 
supported to understand the risks of AI, and women should be central in “ AI-
related decisi on-making positions”.  
● Taking a gender and intersectional sensitive approach to address current 
inequalities: Expand gender -sensiti ve infor mation/data collection for the 
broader ICT sector to inform policies that can advance and ensure the active 
leadershi p and involvement of women in digital and AI services. Standards 
around data quality and representation are essential to eradicatin g 
discri mination against women, and other underserved groups, that occur in AI 
systems trained on bias and unrepresentative, or under -representative, 
datasets.   
● Advancing African -centred value systems in AI ethics: It is essential to 
address ethical conce rns surr ounding AI deployment. Governments, industry 
players, and other stakeholders should play a key role in creating regul atory 
and policy frameworks centred in African values and principles.  
● International development assistance: In advancing developmen t of 
“responsible AI solutions” in Africa, “ donors, intergovernmental organisations 
and other funders should concentrate on s upporting efforts to build inclusive 
digital infrastructure and develop long term local capacity in AI governance”. In 
doing this, focus sh ould also be placed on “ ensuring African states retain their 
sovereignty in developing AI governance solutions” that are rooted in national 
values . 
● Collaboration and know ledge sh aring:  There is a need for collaboration and 
knowledge -sharing among countries and regions to promote the global 
depl oyment of AI for public value creation. African countries can benefit from 
partnerships with more advanced economies to enable them  to leap frog 
development stages and accelerate AI adoption.  
● Accountability for risk : A governance framework for AI in which t he handful of 
corporations driving rapid AI development are required to account to public 
authorities for the current and future ri sks pres ented by the technologies that 
they are developing and are required both to manage risk and to maintain 
international  trust.  
38  