  
 
1 
 
Contribution  from  the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE ) 
April 2023  
  
On behalf of the Board of the Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE) Foundation, we submit 
the following contribution to the Global Digital Compact. The GFCE appreciates  that the 
consultative process on the Global Digital Compact is inclusive and transparent, ensuring that the 
voices of civil society and multi -stakeholder actors are represented appropriately. The GFCE 
would also like to recognize the efforts of  the UN Tech Envoy office , and co -facilitators  Rwanda 
and Sweden, in paving the way towards consensus on shared principl es for an  open, free and 
secure digital future for all .  
 
The GFCE  is a neutral, apolitical platform for international cooperation and exchange on 
strengthening cyber capacity and expertise globally. Established in 2015, its multi- stakeholder 
network compr ises of over 190  organizations including governments, civil society, academia, 
private sector, and international organizations.  On this occasion, we respectfully provide input on 
digital connectivity  for your consideration.  
 
1. Connect all people to the inter net, including all schools  
 The GFCE believes that every citizen of the world should be able to fully reap the benefits of 
information communication technologies (ICTs)  through a free, open, peaceful and secure digital 
world.  The GFCE is committed to advancing digital connectivity as a vital driver of sustainable 
development and human rights for all people. Digital connectivity also contributes to the 
realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. At the same time, we recognize that 
digital connectivity comes with challenges and risks, as cyberspace is increasingly exploited by malicious actors. Therefore, the GFCE advocates for cybersecurity and cyber capacity building  
as crucial elements t o digital connectivity, as they enable countries and communities to protect  
themselves from cyber threats and vulnerabilities, develop skills, and harness the opportunities 
of cyberspace.  
 
 
Core Principles for Governments, International Organizations, Businesses Universities and Other 
Relevant Stak eholders  
• Digital connectivity is a key enabler of sustainable development that should be available, 
affordable, accessible,  and meaningful for all people.  
• Ensuring universal access to the internet should be a priority for all nations, especially 
prioritizing  marginalized communities (e.g. women and girls, remote and rural 
communities, ethnic minorities and indigenous people, persons with disabilities, older 
people).  
• Bridging the digital divide requires collaboration between governments, the privat e 
sector, civil society, and other stakeholders.  
• Cybersecurity and cyber capacity building are essential components of digital 
connectivity, as they ensure countries and communities can protect themselves from 
cyber threats and vulnerabilities, and fully  leverage the benefits of cyberspace.  
• Cyber capacity building should follow a multi -stakeholder, inclusive and human- centric 
approach that involves collaboration and coordination among governments, international 
  
 
2 
 
organizations, non- governmental organiz ations, civil society, private companies, the 
technical community and academia. 1 
 
Key Commitments , Pledges, Actions  
• Raise awareness and understanding of the internet and its benefits among all segments 
of society, especially marginalized communities who face greater barriers to digital 
inclusion.  
• Enhance the digital skills and competencies of individuals and organizations to enable 
them to use the internet effectively and safely for various purposes.  
• Support the adoption and implementation of cyber securi ty standards and best practices 
by public and private sector entities to enhance trust and interoperability in cyberspace.  
• Continue supporting the implementation of SDG Target 9c, which ai med to provide 
universal and affordable access to the internet in LDCs  by 2020;  by expanding network 
coverage, reducing service costs, and increasing device affordability.  
• Encourage information sharing and knowledge transfer among different stakeholders to 
identify best practices in cyber capacity building and digital connectivity initiatives , for 
example through platforms like the GFCE . 
• Promote the development of national and regional digital transformation strategies that reflect the importance of  digital co nnectivity , universal internet access , and 
cybersecurity.  
• Establish clearer links between cyber capacity building and development , and increase 
resources for actionable commitments .2 
• Support research and development efforts to identify new solutions to bridging the digital divide and enhancing digital connectivity.  
• Encourage private sector investment in digital infrastructure development in developing 
countries, in collaboration with local stakeholders and international organizations.  
 
 
 
 
1 The GFCE has developed capacity building principles as codified in the GFCE’s Delhi Communiqué on 
the Global Agenda for Cyber Capacity Building , endorsed by the GFCE community. These principles 
were based on general principles for development and capacity building set out in the Busan Partnership 
for Effective Development Co- operation, directly linking thus cyber capacity building with international 
development principles.   
2 To this end, the GFCE is co- organizing a Global Conference on Cyber Capacity Building in 2023, in 
partnership with the World Bank, World Economic Forum and Cyber Peace Institute, and with the support 
of several  UN Member States. Amongst other things, the Conference will raise decision- makers’ 
awareness of how cybersecurity and capacity building support digital, social and economic development, 
in line with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  