 
 
Palacio de Cañete C/ 69, planta 1 · 28013 Madrid · Spain  www.clubmadrid.org   
Protecting Shared Societies in the Digital Space: how to build inclusive 
online discourse ? 
 
1. Club de Madrid (CdM)  
 
Club de Madrid (CdM)  is the world's largest forum of democratic former Presidents and 
Prime Ministers, who leverage their individual and collective leadership experience and 
global reach to strengthen inclusive democratic practice and improve the well -being of 
people around t he world.  
 
As a non -partisan and international non -profit organisation, it counts on the hands -on 
governance experience of more than 100 Members from over 70 countries, along with a 
global network of advisers and partners across all sectors of society.  
 
This unique alliance stimulates dialogue, builds bridges and engages in advocacy efforts 
to strengthen public policies and effective leadership through recommendations that 
tackle challenges such as inclusion, sustainable development and peace, at the nation al 
and international levels.  
 
2. The Coalition for Religious Equality and Inclusive Development (CREID)  
 
The Coalition for Religious Equality and Inclusive Development (CREID)  is a consortium, 
convened by the Institute of Development Studies (IDS). It looks at how poverty reduction 
efforts can actively redress religious inequalities, support inclusive, religiously diverse 
communities and promote the benefits of interdependence among people beyond 
religious and non -religious  lines.  
 
CREID , which is funded by the UK Government’s  Aid Connect  programme  is governed through 
a collaboration between  the Institute of Development Studies  al Khoei Foundation ,  Minority 
Rights Group  and Refcemi , working in partnership with dozens of NGOs, social movements, 
academics, media and practitioners worldwide . 
 
The consortium draws together a formidable wealth of expertise and experience in 
understanding the way in which individuals and groups’ right to belief (or non -belief) is upheld 
or violated, in poverty reduction and pathways o f empowerment and in informing policy and 
challenging practice.  
 
3. Rationale  
 
One important element in the recent evolution of the multilateral system’s governance 
and of democratic societies has been the growth and role of digital transformation and 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in almo st every facet of our lives. Digital technologies have 
 
 
 
2 |  clubmadrid.org  Promoting inclusive online speech  
 
 
        
 
brought unprecedented opportunities and challenges and we must find a way to maximize 
its benefit and minimize harm. The COVID‐19 outbreak and ensuing global health crisis 
clearly accelerated the widespread deployment of digital technologies and Artificial 
Intelligence, underlining our structural interdependence and the need to strengthen 
international cooperation and the multilateral system as we build a common digit al 
governance mechanism capable of ensuring an open, free and secure digital future for all.   
 
Of the many challenges to be addressed in the field of digitalization and Artificial 
Intelligence, we need to continue pursuing an inclusive, accountable, fair,  transparent, 
sustainable and ethical system centred  around people, where rights and a rules‐based 
order are respected, and  is of fundamental importance. Such a system would contribute 
to Shared Societies1, as it is built on the inclusion of all peoples an d truly leaving no one 
behind.  Digital technologies have been elevated into fundamental instruments of 
resilience and inclusion, but they also have increasingly become instruments of 
disinformation, exclusion, hate speech, and incitement to violence. Their  prominence, in 
all areas of society is not  declining and t he pandemic is receding, so, it is still important to 
tackle new dynamics of exclusion and discrimination arising from the digital 
transformation.  
 
The negative impacts of digital transformation are disinformation, exclusion, hate speech, 
and incitement to (and organizing of) violence against individuals, groups, and political 
opponents, among others. Hate speech and verbal abuse online continues to b e frequent 
and, although there has been progress in content regulation and the protection of 
fundamental rights online, people are still suffering attacks related to racism, 
discrimination based on sexual orientation and religious beliefs.  
 
In this contex t, we  propose d to co-convene a consultation process  built on CdM ’s work 
on the role of political leaders in tackling divisive rhetoric and promot ing inclusive speech, 
and on the study on migration narratives i n Latin America,  as well CREID ’s track record i n 
monitoring and countering hate speech  in the Midd le East and Asia. Such a meeting aimed 
to  turn our attention  to  the  particular  dynamics  of  online  discourse  ‐‐  how  divisive 
and exclusionary rhetoric is spreading over the internet, the dehumanizing and potentially 
violent consequences of that rhetoric , and what innovative practices  different power 
holders can take to generate counter -narratives, pro -actively shape this important space 
as well as foster a more inclusive and egalitarian discourse .  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Club de Madrid defines a Shared Society  as one in which all individuals and constituent groups hold status as 
equally contributing participants, free to express their differences while integrating their voices within the broader 
population. It respects everyone’s dignity and human rights while providing every individual with equal 
opportunity.  
 
 
 
 
3 |  clubmadrid.org  Promoting inclusive online speech  
 
 
        
 
 
4. Background note on Club de Madrid’s contribution to Our Common Agenda  report  
 
On November 27th, 2020 Club de Madrid President, Danilo Türk, received a letter from 
UNSG inviting “the distinguished members of the Club de Madrid, drawing on their 
extens ive experience as world leaders, to share ideas with me in the coming months on 
how we can put in place the inclusive, networked and effective multilateralism that is 
necessary to address the world’s biggest global challenges both today and in the future.”   
 
To respond to the UNSG´s request, the CdM Secretariat, under the leadership of President 
Türk, launched an internal consultation process which included a series of online, regional 
conversations with CdM Members and Advisors, and a written procedure to ensure that 
all were able to contribute to this joint reflection.  
 
As a result of this process, CdM prepared a report with concrete proposals aligned with  
the 12 commitments of the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy -fifth 
Anniversary of the United Nations , aimed to put in place an inclusive, networked and 
effective multilateralism able to address the world’s biggest global challenges.  
 
Once Our Common Agenda  report was released, and following CdM's strategic pillars for 
2020 -2022, our organization continued working on distilling the elements crucial to 
building a human -centred governance of Artificial Intelligence and digital societies. Our 
intention was to feed into ongoing regional and global discussions and serve as a platform 
for dialogue and an instrument for building bridges between different communities of 
practice in the design and construction of an internationally agreed normative fr amework 
to govern and regulate the era of digital transformation and Artificial Intelligence.  
 
In this context, CdM had the opportunity to participate in the follow -up to the UNSG Our 
Common Agenda Report informal thematic consultations  convened by the President of the 
General Assembly in February 2022. Member Hanna Suchocka participated in the 3rd 
Cluster, “Frameworks for a peaceful world – promoting peace, international law, and 
digital cooperation,” focusing on CdM’s support for all t hree issues and highlighting the 
need to strengthen international cooperation and the multilateral system as we build a 
common digital governance capable of ensuring an open, free and secure digital future 
for all where Human Rights and rules -based order a re respected and of fundamental 
importance.  
 
5. Purpose of the meeting  
 
CdM in partnership with CREID  generate d a reflection process t o understand online hate 
speech, how to create and spread content which improves attitudes or contributes to the 
prevention of violent action; and engage in advocacy for policies addressing rel igious minority 
discrimination, to ensure that all individuals are able to exercise their right to freedom of 
expression online, while also protecting them from harm and ensuring a safe a nd inclusive 
online environment.  
 
 
 
4 |  clubmadrid.org  Promoting inclusive online speech  
 
 
        
 
 
6. Agenda  
 
Date:  28 April, 2023  
Time: 8:00 – 9:30 EST / 14:00 – 15:30 CEST   
Zoom Link:  
https://clubmadrid -
org.zoom.us/j/81902881503?pwd=Z1o1cmY1NFNjcWNBdUEra05XbWFkZz09  
 
1. Welcome words by CdM and CREID  
 
2. Introduction of the meeting’s objectives  
 
3. CdM Members’ interventions   
 
 Zlatko Lagumdžija  – Prime Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina (2001 -2002)  
 Rexhep Meidani  – President of Albania (1997 -2002)  
 
4. Open  discussion to all participants  
 
 Mariz Tadros , Professor of Politics and Development at the Institute of 
Development Studies (IDS) , University of  Sussex and Director of CREID  
 Haroon Baloch,  Programme Coordinator,  Bytes for All  
 Salam Omer,  Executive Director, Kirkuk Now  
 Jaffer Mir, Al-Khoei Foundation  
 Maryam Kanwer,  HR Advocate and Researcher HR Advocate and Researcher, 
Al-Khoei Foundation  
 Ali Abbas , Executive Director, HIVE Foundation  
 Wendy Via, Co-founder//CEO and President, Global Project Against Hate and 
Extremism  
 Heidi Beirich,  Co-Founder //Global Project Against Hate and Extremism  
 Azin Mojarherin , Human Rights Lead, MIAAN Group  
 Htet Swe,  Executive Director, Peace Point -Myanmar ( PPM ) 
 May Homira Rezai , President, Hazara Committee  in the  UK 
 James Chalm , Stakeholder Engagement Manager, Content Policy at Meta  
 Peter Stern,  Director, Content Policy Stakeholder Engagement at Meta  
 Esther M. McIntosh , Senior Advisor, Shared Societies Project, CdM  
 Rubén Campos,  Programmes Coordinator, CdM  
 Diego Gitano,  Programme Officer, CdM  
 María Fernanda Robayo,  Programme Officer, CdM  
 
5. Wrap up & conclusions  
Facilitator:  Claire Thomas,  Co-Executive Director,  Minority Rights Group International (MRG)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 |  clubmadrid.org  Promoting inclusive online speech  
 
 
        
 
7. Recommendations  
Apply human rights online  
a) Core Principles  
 
 To respect existing international norms and standards on hate speech, 
freedom of speech, discrimination and inclusion and develop novel ways of 
responding to this dynamic space . 
 To recognise that religious (as well as ethnic,  religious, racialised, linguistic and 
descent) minorities are particularly vulnerable to hate speech amplified by 
digital divide and the relationship between online -offline mobilization of 
speech hate . 
 To promote the development of people -led approaches t o counter hate 
speech through the localisation agenda . 
 To incorporate digital awareness as a development and human rights in its 
social development and poverty alleviation programmes .  
 To share and circulate best practice in countering hate speech and encourage 
knowledge exchange among communities of practice .  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
UN/Intergovernmental  
 
 Make the UN  Forum on Business and Human R ights  accountable for human rights 
commitments and compliance of businesses operational in the digital sector, 
including funding marginalised - and hate speech impacted - communities to attend 
the Forum for an initial period.  
 To encourage multilateral agreements that recognise that businesses in the digital 
sector have a special responsibility to be held accountable for operations and impacts 
beyond the national borders of states in which they are established.  
 To include measures for building an accountable, inclusive digital sector in the UN 
Business and Human Rights Treaty  
 To incorporate indicators and targets in the post 2030 SDG agenda pertaining to 
freedom from hate speech and follow up mechanisms of imple mentation  
 To ensure that UN Senior staff including UN Resident Coordinators are fully aware of 
hate speech and its risks and create action plans in consultation with affected groups.  
 
Governments  
 
 To take a very cautious approach when legislating against online hate speech as there 
are examples of such legislation being used against peaceful a nd legitimate freedom 
of speech.  
 To legisla te to regulate  the human rights compliance of digital provision companies 
with extraterritorial coverage given the inherently global and transnational nature of 
almost all digital services and functions.  
 To use soft diplomatic power to influence all UN member states to address breaches 
of human rights online in state treaty reports (CERD, CEDAW, ICCPR etc.) as well as 
during Universal Periodic Reviews and other human rights dialogues . 
 
 
 
6 |  clubmadrid.org  Promoting inclusive online speech  
 
 
        
 
 
Private sector  
 
 Maintain appropriate levels of human rights trained specialist staff, efficient in 
different languages, at all times and regularly review all company processes for human 
rights compliance and any negative human rights related downstream or unintended 
effects, take swift and effective action to remedy problems identified.  
 Ensure transparency in content moderation processes while responding to 
government requests to remove or block legitimate content under the guise of hate 
speech or blasphemy . 
 Attend and contribute constructively to the UN Forum on Business and Human Rights . 
 
Civil society  
 
 Provide independent input into draft new legislation, implementation of existing 
legislation, oversight board decisions and similar.  
 Undertake strategic litigation to establish precedents concerning egregious, flagrant, 
longstanding and/or high risk breaches of human rights.  
 
Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
 
a) Core Principles  
 
Recognise that content that incites or encourages discrimination against any individual or 
group linked to any protected characteristic is defin ed as prohibited hate speech (ICCPR), and 
is a breach of international human rights treaty commitments and should be prohibited i.e. 
that threat of physical violence is not an essential defining characteristic of all hate speech.  
 
b)  Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
Governments  
 
 To include digital literacy and critical thinking, including fact checking content, in all 
education curricula (diversity -friendly).  
 To educate adults via public information materials (multilingual and diversity inclusive 
in design and content) on the dangers of believing everything you can read, hear or 
see online.  
 To s eek to agree pre -election cross party agreements to avoid scapegoating 
vulnerable sections of society for electoral gain (potentially wi th support from neutral 
third parties).  
 To e stablish truly independent mechanisms to investigate allegation of state 
resources being used to fund or support the production of hate speech online content 
and provide access to data and records to allow full a nd transparent investigations.  
 To d istribute government advertising transparently and giving priority to platforms 
that don’t carry hate speech or which positively promote counter hate speech 
content.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
7 |  clubmadrid.org  Promoting inclusive online speech  
 
 
        
 
 
Governments , UN and private sector  
 
 Establish (arms length managed) funds to support civil society counter hate speech 
projects e.g. public education of high risk groups, positive messaging, anti -hate 
speech campaigns.  
 
Private sector  
 
 Increase the level of content moderation staff (especially in high hate speech risk 
locations).  
 Invest in Artificial Intelligence to more accurately and more consistently prevent hate 
speech being uploaded ensuring racial, religious, linguistic biases are avoided.  
 Carry out regular diversity audits of all staff teams and seek to maximise inclusion of 
under -represented and at risk groups in staffing at all levels and in all functions.  
 Ensure full participation of hate speech impacted communities in all new and revised 
content policies.  
 Enter into regular dialogue with representa tives of minority and other hate speech 
impacted communities to understand their experience of using digital services and 
platforms.  
 Fund public interest journalism platforms that promote counter hate speech with 
advertising and support for joint initiativ es. 
 
Civil Society  
 
 Support and empower grassroots marginalised groups to take the lead on countering 
hate speech e.g. on establishing the levels, targets, perpetrators and impacts, 
educating journalists, influencers, and editors on the damaging impacts of  hate 
speech, positive messaging campaigns to rebalance content biases.  
 Supply independent evidence based data for advocacy to show how, where and why 
hate speech is still appearing in digital spaces, its impacts and constructively suggest 
measures that ca n address it.  
 
Signatories  
 
 AlKhoei  
 Bytes for all  
 Club de Madrid (CdM)  
 The Coalition for Religious Equality and Inclusive Development (CREID)  
 Global Project Against Hate and Extremism (GPAHE)  
 Hazara Committee in UK (HCUK)  
 KirkukNow Media Outlet – Iraq 
 Mariz Tadros  
 Minority Rights Group (MRG)  
 Peace Point  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 |  clubmadrid.org  Promoting inclusive online speech  
 
 
        
 
 
Annex: Good practice examples  
Of monitoring hate speech  
https://minorityrights.org/publications/online -hatred -pushing -minorities -to-the-periphery -
an-analysis -of-pakistani -social -media -feeds/  
https://minorityrights.org/publications/hatefull -places/  
Of publishing counter hate speech  
https://kirkuknow.com/en/myStory  
https://creid.ac/blog/2022/09/21/mohsins -story -grassroots -activist -from -poor -christian -
quarter -in-islamabad -now -writes -for-major -media -outlets -in-pakistan/  
Of Anti -Hate Speech campaign  
https://www.ohchr.org/en/get -involved/stories/i -dont -forward -hate -online -campaign -
against -hate -speech -pakistan  
On building the capacity of CSOs to tackle all aspects of hate speech  
https://minorityrights.org/publications/hate -speech/  
On cross national research to understand the phenomenon and share learning:  
https://www.ids.ac.uk/events /incite -identifying -and-challenging -online -hate -speech/  
 
 
 
 
 