 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  1 
 UNHCR Submission for Global Digital Compact  
Connect all people to the internet, including Schools.  
 
a) Core Principles.  
 
UNHCR believes that forcibly displaced and stateless communities should have 
equitable access to digital technology and channels in line with their hosting 
communities and be able to use them to pursue opportunities for lifelong 
learning, inclusion in the digital economy, leisure, and solutions.  
 
UNHCR acknowledges that while many initiatives are designed to support the 
digital inclusion of a range of communities, in many cases forcibly displaced and 
stateless people are left behind. Some of these initiatives take an intersectional 
approach, others target specific groups, however, one thing that often ties the se 
approaches together is a focus or presumption towards digital inclusion of 
nationals or citizens of state, whether implied or explicit.  
 
However, almost all states host individuals who are not citizens - including 
approximately 50 million people forcibl y displaced abroad or stateless. When we 
collectively seek to further digital inclusion and connectivity for all through the 
Digital Compact, we must do so keeping in mind the central, transformative 
promise of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development a nd its Sustainable 
Development Goals - to leave no one behind. UNHCR believes this is a principle 
that should be carried through the compact, always inclusive of forcibly displaced 
and stateless communities.  
 
To deliver on this promise of digital inclusion  and connectivity for all, there are 
essential areas of focus that require addressing. Together we must ensure that 
forcibly displaced and stateless communities:  
 
1) Are meaningfully integrated into national strategies and frameworks for 
digital inclusion and universal access and digital gender, age and 
disability gaps have been dramatically reduced,  
2) Can be supported by legal and regulatory environments that allow them to 
register SIM Cards, get connected, and access digital financial services.  
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  2 
 3) Can access meaningful and affordable connectivity services in line with 
the communities that host them, both individually and at key institutions 
such as schools  
4) have a ccess to learning environments that prepare students, and their 
communities, to meaningfully engage within a connected society and 
make informed choices,   
5) Can safely engage in the digital economy and pursue digitally -enabled 
jobs and livelihoods,  
6) have the  skills available to use and contribute to the creation of not only 
basic but advanced digital services for whatever purpose they choose.  
 
Finally, that forcibly displaced and stateless people, and the communities that 
host them, have a vital role to play and should not been seen as passive 
recipients of digital transformation. We must ensure their views are heard, their 
priorities are built in, and their skills are leveraged – so they can help drive the 
change their communities want to see.  
 
b) Key Commitmen ts pledges actions  
 
UNHCR will continue to play an active role in dialogue and in driving forward a 
digital inclusion agenda in the months and years to come, in partnership with 
many organizations contributing to the Digital Compact Agenda.  
 
UNHCR believe  the following collective commitments will help achieve the vision 
and above outlined principles that will ensure that forcibly displaced and stateless 
communities are not left out of the connected society and wider digital 
transformation:  
 
1) Eliminating th e connectivity coverage gap in refugee -hosting areas, 
rolling out infrastructure and supporting its deployment as needed  
2) Working with communities, specifically youth, to enhance digital 
inclusion and break down social and cultural barriers through 
communit y-based approaches.  
3) Implementing targeted digital inclusion interventions aimed at 
marginalized groups such as women and girls, the elderly or people 
with disabilities.  
4) To include forcibly displaced and stateless people within government 
strategy, planning  and budgeting across key digital inclusion and 
connectivity issues, ranging from broader technology access to 
specific sectors such as education and health.  
5) Accelerating Private Partnerships, moving beyond traditional 
partnership modalities to new and inn ovative arrangements designed 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  3 
 to strengthen digital inclusion, improve access to jobs, technology, 
knowledge, and guidance.  
6) Promoting community -led approaches and local ownership of digital 
solutions by working with refugee -led and community -based 
organiza tions.  
7) Include refugee -hosting schools and communities in national and 
regional digital policies, planning and budgets, encouraging actors to 
design for the most remote communities and locations from the onset.  
8) To provide predictable financing to support g overnments and partners 
to expand impactful digital inclusion and connectivity programming in 
a sustainable manner; prioritizing inclusion of a greater number of 
refugee -hosting communities.  
9) To increase access to a larger number of quality digital learning  
materials that are aligned to national curricula, respond to local 
context and needs, and are available in local languages and 
languages of instruction.  
10) To ensure digital awareness and protection programming is 
incorporated into all digital and connectivi ty programming, to increase 
understanding and agency of refugees and host communities who 
engage online.  
 
Protect Data  
a) Core Principles  
 
Realising the right to privacy and protecting the personal data of refugees, 
internally displaced and stateless people is a fundamental part of the 
international legal framework for their protection. This framework applies and 
must be respected both offline and online.  
 
The authorities of host States that are responsible for determining asylum claims 
and w hich process the personal data of refugees should respect the 
confidentiality of asylum information and closely regulate data sharing and 
access, particularly in relation to the authorities of countries of origin. These 
standards aim to prevent new risks a rising for asylum seekers or their families in 
the host country and protect the integrity of asylum systems as well as the safety 
of asylum seekers’ relatives or associates remaining in the country of origin.  
Implementing these protections and the rights of the forcibly displaced and 
stateless as data subjects is of growing importance in an increasingly digital 
world, starting with the right to information about how their personal data is 
processed.  
 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  4 
 Although forcibly displaced and stateless often face obs tacles in getting 
connected, they are increasingly online, using social media platforms and 
accessing digital services, including humanitarian assistance. In a global survey 
and consultations to develop UNHCR’s Digital Transformation Strategy 2022 -
2026, th e people UNHCR serve said that they want access to more safe and 
robust online services and trusted protection information. UNHCR’s operations 
are increasingly meeting this demand, using preferred channels of the people we 
serve, if safe and appropriate. S ome host States are also bringing online capacity 
to asylum systems, a trend accelerated by their responses to the Covid 19 
pandemic.  
 
These new opportunities also bring new risks. Asylum seekers and refugees can 
be identified and tracked online, jeopardi sing their protection. The sharing of or 
access to the personal data of refugees across national borders in digital 
systems, including by the private sector, must respect the established principles 
of refugee protection, including their right to privacy.  
 
UNHCR and other humanitarian organizations are also concerned that personal 
data processed for humanitarian purposes in their information systems may be 
subject to cyberattacks, perpetrated by a range of actors, creating additional 
protection risks, parti cularly in fragile and conflict -affected contexts. Such attacks 
may lead to significant risks for people UNHCR serves and jeopardises life -
saving humanitarian assistance.  
 
b) Key Commitments pledges actions  
 
UNHCR would like to see the GDC contain a commitme nt from a ll stakeholders 
to respect the established principles of international law, including refugee law, 
relating to the protection of personal data of asylum seekers, refugees, internally 
displaced people, stateless people and returnees that is process ed in digital 
systems.   
 
The GDC should also condemn cyberattacks on digital systems used for 
humanitarian assistance and call on all stakeholders to work to prevent them and 
to increase collective cybersecurity preparedness and response.  
 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  5 
 The GDC should urge States to reflect these digital and data protection 
considerations in strengthening national legislative frameworks on privacy, data 
protection and cybersecurity, within a human rights -based approach. The private 
sector, including social media platfor ms and suppliers of digital services, such as 
the financial services and ICT sectors, should be encouraged to implement these 
principles and set up user -centric solutions for the forcibly displaced and 
stateless to better manage how their personal data is processed online and help 
avoid risks.   
 
The GDC should highlight the importance of increasing the digital skills of the 
forcibly displaced and stateless, to help fulfil their rights as data subjects, make 
informed choices about the digital services and s ervice providers they use and 
manage their digital footprint to minimise the risks that online identification and 
profiling can create for them.  
 
In these ways the GDC’s multistakeholder approach can contribute to protecting 
individuals who are potentially  at heightened risk and contribute to creating a safe 
digital humanitarian space, rooted in international law.  
 
UNHCR has in place policies that regulate its processing of personal data, 
including the data of the people it serves. They include standards fo r UNHCR’s 
sharing of and access to personal data with and by its partners, as part of the 
delivery of humanitarian assistance and protection. They regulate UNHCR’s 
delivery of humanitarian assistance using digital financial services and use of 
digital plat forms and messaging technology to strengthen communication with 
and accountability to the people we serve. This framework has recently been 
strengthened by the adoption of a General Policy on Personal Data Protection 
and Privacy on 22 December 2022.  UNHCR  also has an established 
cybersecurity programme that aims to secure digital systems and protect people 
and a new Policy on Information Security which came into effect on 1 March 
2023. Operations are increasingly working with communities to strengthen thei r 
skills to manage digital risks. Digital Protection is one of the five priority areas of 
UNHCR’s Digital Transformation Strategy. UNHCR pledges to continue efforts to 
meet existing and emerging challenges, including by strengthening its capacity to 
implem ent these priorities at headquarters, regional and field levels.  
 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  6 
 Apply Human Rights Online  
 
a) Core Principles  
 
Although forcibly displaced and stateless often face obstacles in getting connected,  
they are increasingly connected and online, accessing digital content and services. 
Online access to life -saving online protection information, feedback, complaints 
and response mechanism can strengthen humanitarian response and 
accountability to affected  people. Alongside these opportunities, new digital risks 
arise that have a profound impact the online and offline lives of the people UNHCR 
serves. They include the online targeting of people on the move for exploitation, 
such as trafficking as well as to xic online narratives and hate speech that are both 
a root cause of forced displacement and a protection threat to those forced to flee.  
 
As a matter of principle, UNHCR considers that international human rights law 
framework applies and must be respected both offline and online by all 
stakeholders. This also applies to the specific international legal framework for the 
protection of refugees, internally displaced and stateless people. Together they will 
be referred to as the “relevant international legal f ramework”.  
 
As a starting point, the importance of avoiding discrimination by ensuring that 
forcibly displaced and stateless people have the opportunity to get connected 
should be emphasized and the role of all stakeholders in facilitating their digital 
inclusion should be stressed. This extends across a broad range of areas including 
regulation on SIM card registration, device access to mobile telecommunications 
infrastructure reaching remote areas where refugees are often required to reside.  
 
In addition  to the core principles cited herein, please also refer to the other parts 
of UNHCR’s response containing specific recommendations relevant to applying 
human rights online, in particular , the sections on Protecting Data, Promoting the 
Regulation of AI and Accountability for Discrimination and Misleading Content.  
 
UNHCR would welcome a commitment, in principle, from all GDC stakeholders to 
defining, maintaining and increasing “safe humanitarian  digital space” based on 
the relevant international legal framework and international humanitarian law.  
 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  7 
 As a core principle, GDC could emphasize that the use of digital technology to 
control borders should facilitate access to asylum, not create new barr iers to 
reaching safety. The opportunities increase accuracy, efficiency and integrity of 
asylum, family reunification and resettlement processes or strengthen protection 
and humanitarian response by predicting and responding to population movements 
stemmi ng from conflict or natural disaster could be welcomed, whilst highlighting 
the importance of avoiding risks.  
 
The strengthening of effective due diligence processes, including human rights due 
diligence and privacy and data protection are potentially imp ortant mechanisms for 
all stakeholders to realise these principles.  
 
b) Key Commitments pledges actions  
 
UNHCR would welcome the GDC, including commitments from all stakeholders 
that the relevant international legal framework applies online and offline and t o 
respect the principles therein. Although UNHCR supports a GDC focus area on 
applying human rights online but noting the cross -cutting nature of this theme, 
these considerations should also be mainstreamed across the Compact.  
 
UNHCR’s Digital Transformat ion Strategy 2022 -2026 contains a guiding principle 
on promoting protection, human rights and ethical standards in its use of digital 
technology and a focus area on Digital Protection that includes a set of priority 
actions and results that UNHCR aims to a chieve. This includes increased 
engagement with all stakeholders and partners to promote these objectives. 
UNHCR pledges to continue to realise these foundational elements of its 
Strategy as part of a broader implementation plan, including strengthening it s 
capacity. For example, as noted in detail elsewhere UNHCR is actively 
contributing the development of internal UN Guidance on Ethics and Artificial 
Intelligence and Human Rights Due Diligence and Digital Technologies, including 
piloting approaches to imp lementation.  
 
Accountability for Discrimination and Misleading Content  
 
a) Core Principles  
 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  8 
 Digital channels offer many opportunities for forcibly displaced and stateless 
people. But as digital platforms are incorporated into almost every aspect of our 
lives and societies, the potential for good is diminished by harmful online 
behaviours leaching  from the margins of the digital ecosystem into the 
mainstream. There is a pervasive surge in discriminatory and misleading content 
such as misinformation, disinformation and hate speech. These are causing both 
direct and indirect real -world harm to the mo st vulnerable, especially refugees, 
displaced and stateless people, fueling xenophobia and racism, fear, suspicion 
and mistrust. Real -life harms include challenges in accessing protection, 
persecution and hate crimes, fraud and bullying, sexual exploitatio n and abuse, 
trafficking, gender -based and other forms of violence, and killings. Discriminatory 
and misleading content can be a factor in displacement, as seen in Myanmar 
where a 2018 UN fact finding mission stated that the role of social media was 
signif icant in circulating hate speech that contributed to hundreds of thousands of 
Rohingya being forced to flee the country.  
 
Discriminatory and misleading content is impeding humanitarian action, 
especially in crisis and conflict, following natural disasters , and during election 
cycles, as well as protracted situations. Data shows how mis/disinformation 
thrives in emergency contexts where the integrity of information is vital. 
Coordinated inauthentic behaviour, as well as unintended misinformation, can 
damage  reputations, erode trust and legitimacy of humanitarian organizations. It 
can hamper UNHCR and partners’ ability to protect refugees, displaced and 
stateless people, threaten the physical security of humanitarian workers, and 
jeopardize donor support.  
 
Digital and social media platforms have been widely institutionalized. People rely 
on them to be heard, to organize and to drive change. For education and 
livelihoods, connection with loved ones, and access to news and information. 
These platforms should be  a safe place for all – not just people who use them in 
the most widely -spoken languages, live in their priority markets, and can afford 
subscription models to better terms of service. The protection of stateless and 
displaced people is increasingly threat ened by attacks on information integrity. 
Strengthening digital protection is a priority for UNHCR and many of its UN and 
NGO partners, including through UNHCR’s Digital Transformation Strategy 2022 -
2026.  
 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  9 
 b) Key Commitments pledges actions  
 
All stakeholders  should commit to making digital platforms more accountable and 
transparent, with safety by design and the respect for international human rights 
law and the international legal framework on the protection of refugees, internally 
displaced and stateless pe ople at their core . Experts from diverse backgrounds 
and affected populations, including refugees, stateless and the internally 
displaced, must be meaningfully included in these efforts.  
The GDC should urge the private sector to invest in diverse Trust an d Safety 
capacities. It should emphasize the importance of human content moderation 
mechanisms, alongside promoting ethical and human rights use of AI, in all 
languages and locations their platforms are used in.  In the development of 
search products, gene rative AI and other relevant technologies, the private sector 
should be strongly encouraged to incorporate fact -checking and other measures 
to minimize their risk of propagating misinformation. The GDC should call on 
platforms to stop profiting from harmfu l content, providing financial incentives for 
its distribution, and generating income from discriminatory and misleading 
advertising. The private sector should be encouraged to support independent 
research into links between platform architecture and misin formation. It should 
support UN and civil society efforts to provide credible and impartial public 
information by ensuring their accounts and content are accessible, verified, and 
not downgraded by algorithms, especially given the importance of providing 
information to vulnerable populations in conflict and natural disaster contexts.  
Governments should be encouraged to strengthen trusted channels for 
communications, and take measures to protect stateless and displaced 
populations and humanitarian personnel  from discriminatory and misleading 
content, in full respect for international human rights law.  
Civil society should be encouraged to strengthen research and mitigation efforts, 
seeking insights from affected populations, especially in the Global South, a nd 
empowering community -based early warning systems. Media organizations 
should be asked to report on the origins and impact of discriminatory and 
misleading content, and to strengthen standards for fact -checking organizations.  
Opportunities for the UN sy stem to coordinate and convene stakeholders should 
be welcomed. UN entities should be encouraged to offer expertise and facilitate 
collaboration, including aligning design and content moderation with local needs 
and sensitivities . 
 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  10 
 Regulation of artificial intelligence  
 
a) Core Principles  
Rapidly emerging, high -impact technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) 
must be developed and used in ways which fully respect developing ethical 
standards and international law. This inclu des international human rights law, 
including the right to seek and enjoy asylum, and the international legal 
framework on the protection of refugees, internally displaced and stateless 
people. AI has the potential to advance protection objectives and stre ngthen 
humanitarian response. The further regulation of AI is necessary to promote 
these objectives and manage the risks that arise.  
 
UNHCR has actively contributed to the development of the Principles for the 
Ethical Use of AI in the United Nations System  (“the UN AI Principles”), which are 
based on UNESCO’s Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. It is 
also working closely with UN Partners to develop the United Systems Guidance 
on Human Rights Due Diligence and Digital Technologies, under  the Secretary -
General’s Roadmap on Digital Cooperation and Call to Action on Human Rights. 
These are useful reference points for all actors, including States and the Private 
Sector, in regulating the whole of AI System’s lifecycle, which includes its 
“conception, design, use, development and further deployment” (see Human 
Rights Council Resolution on New and Emerging Digital Technologies (2021) 
A/HRC/47/L.12/Rev.1, para. 5).  
 
AI regulation should play particular attention to situations where the risks of 
human rights violations and unethical applications are higher. This includes 
refugee protection, asylum, border control, as well as situations of conflict and 
fragility.  
 
AI regulation must not contain exemptions or limitations that constitute or 
exacerbat e discrimination and may negatively impact on human rights or refugee 
protection. This could include that some uses of AI in the areas of asylum, 
immigration and border control are not exempted from the full safeguards that are 
applied to the use of AI for  other purposes.  
 
Further research is required into the risks that can arise from the use of AI in 
specific contexts of particular concern to UNHCR, such as for the determination 
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  11 
 of legal status (refugee, statelessness or nationality), including by State 
authorities. They p resent clear risks to accountability for such decisions, raise 
questions on proportionality and transparency and available and accessible 
pathways of redress for affected individuals. These risks must be addressed in a 
manner that is consistent with intern ational human rights, refugee and 
statelessness law, with  prohibitions put in place for certain uses or systems 
where the risk is unacceptable.  
 
It is particularly important to ensure that AI systems are both developed and used 
with respect to the right to  privacy and that data sets used for training must not 
build in discrimination or bias into AI systems, including by amplifying pre -existing 
societal biases.  
 
b) Key Commitments pledges actions  
 
UNHCR would like to see the GDC reflect the principles set out in its response to 
the preceding section. This includes a focus on the application and 
implementation of existing standards in international law and respect for ethical 
standards as a foundation for the regulation of AI. The GDC could explicitly call 
for all stakeholders, including States and the private sector, to apply those 
standards to the use of AI that impacts on the forcibly displaced and stateless, 
where higher risks are likely to apply.  
 
UNHCR pledges to use AI in ways that are consistent with its Digital 
Transformation Strategy 2022 -2026. This includes the Strategy’s guiding 
principles on protection, ethics and human rights and the following specific 
commitments therein:  
 
1) UNHCR’s conception, design, use, development and further 
deployment  of digita l technology, including AI, will meet international 
human rights and ethical standards, with a focus on high -risk 
technologies, uses and contexts.  
2) Prioritising the further strengthening of UNHCR’s capacity to apply 
digital technologies consistent with the se principles.  
3) By engaging and working with governments and private sector 
partners, UNHCR will promote full consideration of the impact of 
digital solutions, including AI, on the protection of the communities 
UNHCR serve, particularly in high -risk contex ts. 
4) UNHCR will ensure increased investment in cybersecurity and the 
protection of the personal data it processes, including in AI systems.  
 
 
 
  www.unhcr.org  12 
 Under the Digital Protection focus area of the abovementioned Strategy, an 
implementation plan includes measures to realise these strategic objectives. 
UNHCR is currently piloting approaches to implement the UN AI Principles and 
the emerging United Nations System -Wide Guidance on Human Rights Due 
Diligence and Digital Technologies Guidance alongside new and strengthened  
UNHCR policies on Privacy and Protection of Personal Data (2022) and 
Information Security (2023). The implementation plan also envisages specific 
research on the uses of AI of potential concern to UNHCR under its Mandate, 
which are highlighted in the sect ion above.  
 
In addition, UNHCR’s Policy on Privacy and Protection of Personal Data provides 
that UNHCR’s  use of AI will respect individuals’ right to privacy and data 
protection, including safeguards against the risk of being subject to automated 
decision -making where a decision produces adverse legal or other significant 
adverse effects on the interests of the affected individual.  
 
The deployment of “general purpose” AI systems in high -risk contexts such as 
asylum, immigration and border control, are like ly to give rise to particular risks. 
The GDC could reference this and the increased responsibility that results for the 
private sector entities that develop “general purpose” AI systems.  
 