 
 
Submission to the Global Digital Compact  
Key Priority Issues on Child Rights and the Digital Environment  
 
April  2023  
 
Joint position paper on behalf of : Child Rights Connect, Alana Institute, ChildFund Alliance, Child Rights 
International Network (CRIN), ECPAT, Foundation for the Student Rights (Poland), Make Mothers 
Matter, Plan International, Plataforma de Infancia, Save the Children, SOS Children’s Villages, Terre 
des Hommes International Federation, World Vision Int ernational and 5Rights Foundation . 
 
Overarching Principles for the Global Digital Compact  
The digital environment plays an increasingly significant role across most aspects of children’s lives, 
offering opportunities but equally presenting significant risks. One in three internet users is a child, 
and, especially since the COVID -19 pandemic, ch ildren’s development, relationships, education and 
play are increasingly mediated by digital technologies.  
Children have long -established rights and protections under the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child (UNCRC), and a life mediated by technology must be held to these standards. 
Thus, in today’s world, where the line between a child’s online  and offline lives is increasingly blurred, 
it is essential to acknowledge that children’s rights apply fully in the digital environment.   
The obligations of States to respect, protect and fulfill child rights in the digital environment, as well 
as the res ponsibilities of the business sector to respect, prevent, mitigate, and, where appropriate, 
remedy abuses, are clearly explained in the Committee on the Rights of the Child General Comment 
No. 25.   
The UN Global Digital Compact is the opportunity to drive awareness and reinforce the global political 
commitment to the implementation  of children’s existing rights as set out in the UNCRC and its 
General comments in the digital world and focus on political will. We recommend that the UN Global 
Digital Compact reaffirm the core tenets of children’s rights in the digital environment and include  
the following key overarching principles to guide all the identified thematic priorities:   
• Recognize  that international human rights law, including the UNCRC, applies in full in the 
digital environment . All children’s rights must be respected, prote cted, and fulfilled  in practice 
online, including but not limited to products and services specifically designed for them or 
directed toward them.    
  
    

• The digital environment must be safe and age -appropriate  for children, taking into account 
that children are not a homogenous group, respect their full range of rights and be designed 
and operated with their best interests in mind, integrating privacy, safety and security by 
design and by default.  
• Ensuring the respect and fulfilment of the right of the child to b e heard with regards to the 
digital environment,  taking children’s views and the diversity of their situations into account 
by States in the development of laws, policies and by businesses in their activities, including 
in relation to the design, developme nt, operation, and marketing of their products and 
services.    
 
The promotion, protection and implementation of children’s rights in the digital environment 
must be a core principle of the UN Global Digital Compact and across all its thematic areas.   
 
Background  
The digital environment plays an increasingly significant  role across most aspects of children’s lives . 
One in three internet users is a child, and, especially since the COVID -19 pandemic, children’s 
development, relationships, education and pla y are increasingly mediated by digital technologies.  
The digital environment is predominantly privately designed, owned,  operated , and  largely 
unregulated.  Regulating and enforcing businesses’ responsibility  to respect children’s rights, prevent 
and remedy abuse of their rights, including through  providing children with a high level of privacy, 
safety and security by design and default , and upholding consistent global standards, is urgent for  
ensuring childre n’s rights in the digital environment.  
Meaningful and equal access to safe digital technologies can support children to realize  the full 
range of their civil, political,  economic , social,  and cultural rights.  Children particularly value access 
to information and exchange, and to expression and having their voice heard. Yet millions of children 
have no access to the digital environment at all. There is a growing cost for children from the digital 
divide, includ ing the gender -related  digital divide.  
Children are not a homogenous group ; their agency, age and maturity,  and different needs must be 
taken into account . Also, some children are disproportionately affected by the risks of the digital 
world , given the intersecting situations of vulnerability they may face. For instance, children with 
disabilities, girls, or children coming from different socioeconomic backgrounds face different barriers, 
including the digital divides. Thus, it is important to  acknowledge that gender, age, disability, and other 
inter -sectional factors impact children’s different experiences online , which must be carefully 
considered.  
The digital environment must be safe for children and respect their full range of rights . At p resent, 
children’s presence goes largely unrecognized  and uncatered for on most of the digital platforms 
where children spend most of their time. Children are consequently exposed to a wide range of 
significant risks in the digital environment relating to content, contact, conduct and contract. These 
encompass, among other things, unfair terms, dark patterns, persuasive design,  profiling and 
automated processes for user retention and information filtering. Children experience egregious 
outcomes , including a ddiction, exposure to violent, radical and sexual content, hate speech, 
disinformation, cyberaggression and harassment, body dysmorphia, gambling, exploitation and abuse, 
including sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as economic exploitation, including child labour and 
exploitation of their vulnerabilities for commercial purposes,  and the promotion of or incitement to 
suicide or life -threatening activities. The growing impact on children’s development, physical and 
mental health, and well-being  is well -documented.  
  
Implementation of children’s rights in the digital environment  
The obligations  of States to respect, protect and fulfil child rights  in the digital environment, as well as 
the responsibilities of the business sector to respect,  prevent, mitigate and, where appropriate, 
remedy abuses , are clearly explained  in General Comment No. 25. Implementing of State  obligations 
and corporate responsibilities  requires effective action .  
To do so , States should prioritize  two core actions:  
1. Developing and implementing comprehensive policies and action plans for children’s rights  in 
the digital environment . 
2. Legislating to ensure business responsibility  to respect children´s rights, and prevent and 
remedy abuse of their right s in relation to the  digital environment . 
 
Comprehensive policy for children’s rights in the digital environment  
States parties must urgently review and update their national polic y frameworks to ensure a holistic 
and comprehensive approach to implementing  children’s rights in the  digital environment  in line with 
the UNCRC . This should include:  
• Identifying and building institutional capacity to ensure a holistic and coordinated approach 
to implementing children’s rights in the digital environmen t across policies, programmes, 
government departments, industry sectors and geographies – taking into account children’s 
views in all their diversity.  
• Mobilizing , allocating and utilizing  public resources to implement legislation, policies and 
programmes n eeded to address the increasing impact of the digital environment on children’s 
rights  and to promote the equality of access to, and affordability of, services and connectivity.  
Specific measures will be required to close the gender -related digital divide for girls.  Children 
with disabilities and the development of assistive technologies should also be a particular  
focus of attention.  
• Undertaking a  comprehensive review of national child protection policies and legislation to 
take full account of the digital environment  and online -offline dynamics .  
• Ensuring access to justice for children’s rights violations in the digital enviro nment, by 
providing for strong and effective monitoring, complaint, investigation, enforcement and 
redress mechanisms , ensuring systemic responses to support and respond to crimes, including 
enabling effective investigation, reviewing sanctions and sentenci ng frameworks.  Complaint 
and reporting mechanisms should be free of charge, safe, confidential, responsive, child -
friendly , and available in accessible formats.  Particular attention should be paid to preventing 
and tackling gender -based violence and child sexual exploitation and abuse.  
• Mandating the use of child rights impact assessments (including child data protection impact 
assessments) to embed children’s rights into legislation, budgetary allocations and other 
administrative decisions and procedures relating to the digital environment and promote their 
use among public bodies.  
• Establishing a coordinated multi -stakeholder framework – including the technology sector and 
civil society organizations  – to tackle risks and promote the exercise by children of their rights 
in the digital environment , including effective legal and regulatory enforcement mechanisms, 
prevention, remedies and access to expert advice on child online safety and well-being . This 
should include promoting child -centred design , minimum standards, industry agreements, 
adoption of best practice and cultural awareness and resourcing of children’s safety and well-
being  in the digital environment through regulation , enforcement of existing legislation  and 
frameworks that relate to c orporate responsibility.   
• Identifying and filling knowledge and capacity gaps, including s trengthening and re -aligning 
the capacity and capability of law enforcement agencies and regulatory bodies in the child 
online safety field , and providing training fo r professionals working for and with children, as 
well as the technology industry.  
• Investing in awareness raising and education to prevent likely harms and promote positive 
internet use and the empowerment of children.  This includes providing resources and  support 
to teachers, parents and caregivers.  
• Ensur ing the respect and fulfilment of the right s of the child to be heard in the digital 
environment , taking children’s  views and the diversity of their situations  into account in the 
development of laws, policies and frameworks.  
• Investing in and promoting research and data collection to inform legislation, policy  and 
practice. States must improve their national data systems and ensure the measurement of the 
prevalence of child sexual exploitation and abuse to assess trends and progress towards its 
elimination.  
• Recognizing  that the digital environment is an essent ial space to enable children to exercise 
their civil and political rights  and facilitat ing the creation of empowering and safe digital 
spaces for chil d human rights defenders (CHRDs) and the exercise by children of their civi l and 
political rights online.  Ensuring that CHRDs , in all their diversity , can safely exercise their rights 
online free from harm and reprisals.  
 
Legislation for corporate responsibility  
The business sector, including not -for-profit organizations , affects children’s rights directly and 
indirectly in the provision of services and products relating to the digital environment. Businesses have  
the responsibility  to respect children’s rights , and prevent and remedy abuse of their rights in relation 
to the digital environment , as set out in the UNCRC General comment s No. 25 and No. 16 . States 
parties have the obligation to ensure that businesses meet th ese responsibili ties, and should develop, 
pass , and enforce legislation:  
• Requiring businesses  to undertake child rights due diligence, in particular , to carry out child 
rights impact assessments and effectively mitigate any risks posed by their products and 
services to children.  
• Requiring businesses to recognize  child users and take into account the diversity of their 
situations.    
• Requiring the business  sector to provide children with a high level of privacy, safety and 
security by design and default , enforcing the adoption of children ’s rights by design standards.  
• Requiring businesses to implement regulatory frameworks, industry codes and terms of 
servi ces that adhere to the highest standards of ethics, privacy and safety in relation to the 
design, engineering, development, operation, distribution and marketing of their products 
and services , including for artificial intelligence.  
• Holding businesses accountable for infringements of children’s rights facilitated by their 
products or services, including through the design and operation of digital services.  
• Prohibiting the unlawful digital surveillance of children by businesses, particularly i n 
commercial settings and educational and care settings.  
• Prohibiting the use of children’s personal data and targeting of children using techniques 
designed to prioritize  commercial interests over those of the child , including behavioural  
advertising . 
• Requ iring businesses to maintain high standards of transparency and accountability.  
• Requiring businesses to provide children, parents,  and caregivers with prompt and effective 
remedies.  
• Requiring businesses to provide age -appropriate explanations to children, and parents and 
caregivers for very young children, of their terms of service.  
• Encouraging businesses to actively engage with children, applying appropriate safeguards, 
and give the ir views due consideration when developing products and services . 
• Encouraging businesses to take measures to innovate in the best interests of the child.  
• Encouraging businesses to provide public information and accessible and timely advice to 
support children’s safe and beneficial digital activities.   