EURODIG’S SUPPLEMENTARY INFORM ATION  
 IN SUPPORT OF ITS RESP ONSE TO THE ONLINE 
CONSULTATION  ON THE  GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
 
Contents  
 
I. EuroDIG’s active engagement  in the GDC process  and related  UN initiatives  
II. EuroDIG’s consultation s on the Global Digital Compact                                           
III. EuroDIG ’s responses to the Te ch Envoy ’s consultation on specific  thematic areas  
IV. Conclusions                            
 
I. EuroDIG’s  active engagement  in the  GDC process and related UN 
initiatives  
 
Since it was first held in Strasbourg in 2008 as an annual multistakeholder the 
Euro pean regional Internet governance forum Euro DIG has developed a strong track 
record as a leading , globally influential regional Internet forum  for promoting 
multistakeholder dialogue on key Internet policy issues, challenges and 
opportunities, and for fostering collaborative initiatives . As a multista keholder 
regional  forum  established a mutually constructive relationship with the annual global 
Internet Governance Forum (IGF) convened under the auspices of the United 
Nations as part of the ex panding global IGF ecosystem  of governance . Further 
information  about  EuroDIG ’s aims, activit ies, agenda -setting and g overna nce is 
accessible at  https://www.eurodig.org/  
Furthermore, EuroDI G will continue  to play a prominent part in the implement ation of  
recommendation s and reforms for strengthen ing the  global IGF an d build on its 
successful track record since its creation by the World S ummit on the  Inform ation 
Society (the WSIS) in 2005 . EuroDIG accordingly strongly supports  the renewal of 
the IGF’s mandate by the UN General Assembly at the time of the WSIS+20 rev iew 
in 2025  so that it can continue  to serve the best interests of Internet stakeholders 
including  governments, parliam entarians,  the private sector , the technical 
community , civil society and individ ual users worldwide.  
The EuroDIG stakeholder community recognises the critical importance of the UN 
Secretary -General's proposal for adopting a Global Digital Compact at the Summit of 
the Future in 2024 that will prom ote more inclusive and effective cooperation in 
support of an open, free and secure digital future for all , and strengthen the 
multistakeholder mechanisms for governance and constructive stakeholder 
interaction.  Provision has accordingly been made for inf ormation sharing and 
discussion of the Secretary -General’s initiatives  during EuroDIG’s recent annual 
meeting s.  
EuroDI G has engaged directly with the  sequence of  activities  undertaken by the 
Secretary -General ’s initiative on digital cooperation, notably the recommendations of 
the report of his High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation  entitled “The Age of Digital 
Interdependence” (June 2019) which were discuss ed at the EuroDIG annual event in 
The Hague. EuroDIG has subsequently endeavoured to ensure that the European 
stakeholder community is kept fully informed  of key developments  at the UN level , 
including in June 2020 the Secretary -General’s “Roadmap fo r Digital Cooperation” 
with its set of recommended actions .  
EuroDIG has also undertaken stakeholder consultations on individual proposals such 
as the establish ment  of a multistakeholder high level board for the IGF (now known 
as the Leadership Panel) with its key remit on advocacy of outcomes and  advisory 
role on IGF strateg y.  
Updates on these UN initi atives have been provide d by EuroDIG ’s intersessional 
project  on digita l cooperation d etails of which are accessibl e on the  EuroDIG website 
at https://eurodigwiki.org/wiki/Digital_Cooperation  
 
II. EuroDIG’s consultation s on the Global Digital Compact  
The Secretary General’s report “ Our Common Agenda ” suggest ed that the GDC  with 
its shared principles for “an open, free and secure digital future for all ” should cover a 
range of thematic areas and specific issues including digital connectivity, avoiding 
Internet fragmentation, providing people with options as to how their data i s used, 
applying human rights online, and promoting a trustworthy Internet by introducing 
accountability criteria for discrimination and misleading content.  These issues have 
been addressed in  various sessions during  annual EuroDIG meetings in the last 
three years  and their conclusions published for the benefit of the global community 
as “EuroDIG Messages” .  
Recognising that when it is adopted at the Summit of the Future  in 2024 , the Global 
Digital Compact will have a profound influence over the course of digital policy and 
economic a nd social transformation  worldwide, EuroDIG  unde rtook a comprehensive 
online consultation on its scope and potential outcomes  which mirror ed the survey 
questionnaire launched by the UN Office of the Envoy on Technology . As with 
previous EuroDIG consultations, a commenting platform was used for responses 
which  provide d a summary of the EuroDIG Messages from re cent EuroDIG meetings 
which a re relevant to the GDC thematic areas proposed in Our Common Agenda.  
Stakeholders in the  European re gion were inv ited to comment on core principles and 
commitments to action by specific stakeholders , with the aim of developing  a 
substantive input into the GDC development proces s, consist ent with European 
values of universal access, freedom of expression and democratic rights , support ive 
of innovation  and digital transformation that create s new economic opportunities and 
enhance social welfare of all citizens.    
 
 
 
 
III. EuroDIG ’s responses to the Te ch Envoy ’s consultation on 
specific  thematic areas  
1. Connect all people to the Internet, including all schools  
i. Core Principles  
• Access to all devices and to the Internet must be observed as a  universal 
right.   
• Accessibility must take into account all disabilities including the blind and 
deaf. 
• A multi -stakeholder approach  is necessary to raise awareness of relevant 
tools and platforms, to optimise the technical infrastructure for Internet 
access, and to enhance cybersecurity . This is important when connecting 
schools and all places where  learning takes place, including lifelong learning 
centres, libraries and beyon d.  
• Ehealth and the medical Internet o f things (IoT) requires high quality Interne t 
connectiv ity. 
• There are many existing challenges in establishing community networks, 
particularly on the regulatory, funding, and connectivity side. However, 
technical aspects go hand in hand with a strong network of community 
support: both the technology  and the sense of community are crucial 
elements  in ensuring the success of community networks.  
ii.  Commitments to action  
• European policymakers need to devise digital policies that firstly improve 
European digital infrastructure  and secondly build bridges  through strategic 
partnerships with key players  like the US and China.  
• There is a need for increased investment in international connectivity through 
submarine cables and other technologies.   
• Sectoral bundling of connect ivity requirements  can stimulate and increase 
potential investment  e.g. ehealth with agriculture and education . 
• The EU should take decisive steps in establishing a comprehensi ve digital 
connectivity strategy  not only between the member states but also other 
regions, in particular those with high traffic growth in Africa and south 
America.   
• Community networks provide Internet access for and by remote communities. 
When establishi ng community networks, it is crucial to build digital capacity  
both in terms of installation and maintenance of technical infrastructure and in 
terms of developing digital literacy programmes  that ensure users’ meaningful 
participation on the Internet .                                          
• Secure c onnect ivity i s vital for  the healthcare sector  where  digitalisation and 
the medical IoT has revolutioni sed how medical devices are manufactured 
and use d. 
2. Avoid Internet fragmentation  
i. Core Principles  
• The original model for Internet services based on multiple implementations, 
interoperability and open standards , has proved to be effective in countering 
the growth and dominance of " walled gardens " and closed platforms.   
• Any regulatory initiatives aimed at exerting sovereignty in a particular field 
must ensure they do not harm human rights online, do not harm the open and 
global nature of the Internet, and are in line with democratic multi -stakeholder 
principles.  
ii.  Comm itments to action  
• The single, global, multi -stakeholder governance framework should be 
maintained  for the key technical resources of the Internet (including IP 
addresses and domain names).  
• One of the ways to reduce the possibility of a “ splinternet ” is to avoid 
incompatible regulations for Internet infrastructure . Fragmentation at the 
transport layer (IP, DNS root) should be avoided.    
• In regulating the Internet infrastructure, collateral damage should be avoided 
to the services and operators  regarding economic costs and availability and 
avoid fragmentation of the global critical internet infrastructure.   
• Sovereign states have the right to create rules over the usage of the Internet 
by their citizens according to their national values and lega l frameworks , on 
issues such as moderation and removal of content, privacy and data 
protection, fair competition, national security and taxation.  
 
3. Protect data  
i. Core Principles  
• It is imp ortant for a citizen to know how their data  (including personal health 
data) is used, stored, and secured : what are the stages, who has access at 
each particular point.  
• Privacy should be an important issue in everything we do, and its central parts 
should be privacy by design and security  by design .  
• Privacy is about trust, and companies need to demonstrate that they are 
trustworthy. Privacy enhanced technologies  should be everyone’s right . 
ii.  Commitments to action  
• Citizens should have a  choice to control how their data is used by different 
entities in a centralised or a decentralised manner.   
• Entities collecting user data need to be proactive in ensuring transparency 
and accountability .  
• For AI health application s there needs to  be trust and accountability of 
algorithms  and human oversight .  
• The proper consent is required for  users who share their data in return for a 
service. Education and information are key for users to understand what is at 
stake, and to take responsibility.                                                                        
• In the healthcare  sector , patients shoul d be able to move with their personal 
medical data files and be abl e to access their older  medical data files . 
Patients ’ consent should be required for third part y access  to data .  
4. Apply human rights online  
i. Core Principles  
• Digital identity solutions need to be measured not only by their usefulness and 
functionality but more importantly by how they respect and reflect fundamental 
human rights  and common responsibilities.  An ethical policy  approach  is 
therefore  important.   
ii.  Commitments to action  
• Finding the right balance between the control of online content and upholding 
fundamental rights , and between pr ivacy and transpa rency, will continue to  be 
important c onsiderations for policy  makers an d dec ision takers .  
• An ethics-based approach  should be ado pted for brain wave applications  and 
other tr ansformative ehealth applica tions. 
• Given that most cyber incidents occur across borders and that there is no 
common definition of crime and terrorism, co-operation between states and 
with the private sector  on such matters is crucial.  
• A careful impact assessment of new technologies and tools on human rights  
should be carried out to avoid violations of individual rights.  
5. Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
i. Core Principles  
• Media literacy is crucial  in fighting misinformation. It is very important to 
educate and empower people to spot misinformation and make informed 
decisions on whom to trust . 
• Manipulation of media source s whether in the form of disinformation or 
misinformation can fuel violent conflict. Any response must comply with 
human rights and European values, such as democracy and the rule of law.   
 
ii.  Commitments to action  
• Multi -stakeholder involvement  (i.e. the involvement of those directly 
concerned and impacted by misinformation) is of utmost importance in fighting 
misinformation . This is crucial  for example  in relation to me dical and health  
issues.  
• There is also a need for the infrastructure to organise fact checking and 
research activiti es that would be available in all EU languages and would, 
therefore, benefit all EU countries.   
• There is a need  to invest in building media literacy skills in people of all age s. 
• In order to regulate all platforms in a uniform manner, there is a need for a 
more comprehensive reflection on how to construct a  “regulatory backstop”  
that creates more uniformity, more instruments with appropriate oversight 
mechanisms,  and in cases of need, sanctions.  
• The proliferation of harmful content such as disinformation during the recent 
crises has confirmed how it can polarize the public debate  and even be a 
driver of a crisis. A range of actions to counter disinformation is therefore 
needed , 
including:                                                                                                                   
- a complementary approach of soft -law arrangements  such as voluntary 
codes of conduct and regulatory measures  to deal with the strong position of 
platforms;                                                                                                                                          
- the provision of trustworthy content through the  support of  sustainable and 
independent journalism , independent public service media  and trusted 
community institutions  such as librari es;                                                               
- further strengthening of fact -checking initiatives  and increased investment in 
digital and media literacy . 
 
6. Regulation of artificial intelligence  
i. Core Principles  
• The potential risks relating to AI need to be examined holistically . 
• Humans should ultimately remain in command , have oversight  and be 
responsible for AI deployment and applications.                          
• Establishing transparency of data sources and algorithms .  
ii.  Commitments to action  
• In addition to reaching agreement on certain global principles, values and 
possible rights  to guide AI development, such as prevention of 
discrimination, data protection and  governance  (including regular  audits for 
data accura cy and relevance) , building trust, protection of privacy, 
transparency, and human -centred AI, there is also a need to allow regions 
and states to adapt these principles to their own s ituations through 
concrete instruments  targeted at policymakers and other actors.   
• In this process, the multi -stakeholder approach and cross -regional 
dialogue are key for ensuring harmonisation . The current escalating 
geopolitical tensions, however, are ch allenging multi -stakeholderism and 
cross -regional dialogue. There is accordingly a need to take a fresh look at 
them.   
• Investment in educational programmes and raising awareness  is needed 
to help users understand AI technologies, their benefits as well as their risks , 
how algorithms wor k, the impor tance o f con sent relating  to data use etc.   
• Robotics, virtual reality  and quantum computing should all be  taken into 
account in developing the medical IoT  so that the benefits of digitalisation for 
the health  sector  are maximised . 
• Ongoing regional and global initiatives on collabor ation  and information  
sharing should be supported . 
  
7. Digital c ommons  as a global public good  
EuroDIG has a pan -European remit that extends to all countries in the European 
region  including the Member States of the European Union.  Discussions at EuroDIG  
meetings provide an inclusive multistakeholder platform for both the advocacy of 
European values in global discussions and for fostering the kind of multi -country 
collaborative projects and international partnerships envisaged in the UN Secretary -
General’s initiative on di gital cooperation  and the digital commons as a glkobal public  
good .   
Consistent with these objectives, EuroDIG meetings  have provided  the opportunity 
for the European Commission to create  within the wider European geo -political 
environment greater awareness and discussion of EU digital policy initiative s. These 
include Europe’s  Digital Decade  with its targets  for digital transformation by 2030 , 
the Digital Services Act , the Digital Markets Act  and the  Declaration  on Digital  Rights 
and Principles  which emphasises th e importance of putting people and their rights at 
the centre of digital transformation , participation in the digital public space  - “the 
global c ommons”  - and p romoting the sustainability of the digital future . The 
Declaration is an example therefore of how an EU initiative can contribute as an 
existing reference point for European values and principles to the current 
consultations on the GDC . 
The conceptual fram ing o f a global  “digital common s” has not yet been di scussed in 
detail during  recent EuroDIG meetings. However, the following  point  was raised  by a 
stakehol der in EuroDIG ’s most recent  consultation  on the GDC :    
• As recognised by UNESCO in its Futures of Education report *, knowledge 
itself should be a commons  and therefore  efforts to avoid enclosures that 
harm the public interes t should be supported.  
* https://en.unesco.org/futuresofeducation/  
 
8. EuroDIG p roposal for additional GDC thematic area :  Green Digital 
Transformation  
The need  to transition to a green digital economy by the 2030s  has been discussed 
at several recent EuroDIG  meeti ngs. It was the subject  of an intersessio nal project in 
2020-21 on information and communications technology (ICT) sustainability and the 
crucial role of the Internet governance community in ensuring that environmental 
sustainability is at the heart of ICTs thr oughout their lifecycle.  
We are at a critical junction given the urgency of this issue  at a time when the policy 
and regulatory environment recognises the need for more  commit ments to actio n on  
digitisation and sustainability  inline with the 2030 Agen da on S ustainab le 
Developme nt and the follow up to COP 27 on catalysing the green digital 
transforma tion. 
The foll owing proposals for core principles and commitments to action  in the Global  
Digital Compact are largely drawn fro m the report of a workshop held at Eur oDIG ’s 
most recent annual  meeting  in Triest e on 21 J une 2022 . entitle d From commitments 
to action: Assessing the effectiveness of pan -European policies and regulations for 
the green digital transformation .  The full report of this session is acc essible  here . 
i. Core Principles  
• Digitalisation and environmental sustainability must be looked at 
together  and not as two distinct policy areas.  
• Ecological standards should be incorporated  in ICT regulation  and the 
design and production of digita l devices and applications . 
• Regulatory frameworks  shoul d be practical, effective and incentive -based . 
 
ii.  Commitments to action  
• To reduce the environmental impact of the digital world, it is necessary to 
adopt  measures to optimise energy and material efficiency (circularity) of 
the digital sector . For example, increasing the use of renewables, innovating 
for low energy consumption, keeping devices longer in use, facilitating re -use, 
improving repairability and recyclability, and adopting sustainable business 
models.  
• Areas where international coordination  is needed the most are measures to 
promote the  circular economy , to share  environmental data , to reduce 
environmentally harmful consumption , to promote efficiency and enhance 
digital applications , and to ensure  transparency regarding environmental 
costs . 
• Governments, regu lators , industry  sectors and the technical community  
shou ld coop erate in:  
- promo ting the environmental sustainability of the ICT sector ;  
- measur ing its impact on the environment ;   
- ensur ing transparency and corporate accountabilit y;   
- increas ing circular production and consumption ;   
- discourag ing illegitimate exports of e -waste ;  
- promot ing material efficiency by increasing the reuse and repairability of 
devices.  
• Increased cooperat ion, data sharing, and external auditing  are crucial to 
assess and  monit or the envir onment al impact of the ICT sec tor, to avoid 
greenwashing and  to promote transparenc y.  
• Standardis ation of  indicator s is imperative  and c ommon methodologies are 
also necessary  to measure and compare the net -environmental be nefits 
of digital solutions . 
Drawing on its exami nation o f this key issue which the EuroD IG multistak eholde r 
community stands ready to assist the GDC co-facilitators in developing  green 
digital isation as an additional core them atic area  of the Com pact.  
 
IV. Conclusion s 
 
The proposed Global Digital Compact provides an important opportunity for 
European stakeholders to promote  Europ ean core values and principles , including 
those embedded in the EU’s digital objectives and targets,  in a UN instrument that 
will set the course  for digital cooperation in support of the open, free, unfragmented 
and sustainable Internet -based eco -system of global digital cooperation.  
 
EuroDIG  provide s a pro-active channel for  stakeholders across the continent  of 
Europe to contr ibute to achieving th ese aims . A workshop  to discuss the GDC 
process and related UN initi atives will be held during  the ne xt annual m eeting of 
Euro DIG in Tampere, Finland , on 19 June 202 3. This interactive worksh op will aim to 
agree further consens us-based agreement and messages in support of the GDC 
proces s. The full programme for the annual meeting can be accessed at 
https://eurodigwiki.org/wiki/Consolidated_programme_2023 .  
 
The Eu roDIG multi stakeholde r community looks forward  to being engaged in and 
contributing  to all stages of the GDC  process, including  the fina lisation  of the  scope 
and content of the Compact  during 2023 -34, its launch a t the Summit of the Future in 
Septem ber 2 024 an d the su bsequent implementation  phase .   
 
Sandra Hoferich ter, Secre tary General  of Euro DIG 
30 April 2023  