A digital framework for a future 
where everyone in the digital  
world can enjoy the right to safety, 
freedom and dignity.
www.audri.org
The Alliance for  
Universal Digital Rights (AUDRi)  
was formed in 2022 by two 
international gender equality and 
advocacy organizations, Equality Now 
and Women Leading in AI.Imagine a future in which all citizens 
of the global digital ecosystem, no 
matter who they are or where they 
live, can enjoy equal rights to safety, 
freedom, and dignity. 
This means:
Equal protection from persecution, 
discrimination, and abuse
Equal access to information, 
opportunity, and community
Equal respect for privacy, identity,  
and self-expression
Such a future can only become a 
reality if governments and leaders 
around the world put into place mutual 
and binding agreements  
to uphold these rights, to minimize 
opportunities for their infringement, 
and to develop universal mechanisms 
to hold violators to account.
Because the digital environment,  
like the natural environment, 
transcends borders. And just as the efforts of individual 
nations alone can never solve a 
worldwide environmental crisis, nor 
can we rely on separate national laws 
and policies to guide, regulate, and 
care for our global digital ecosystem.
T o achieve universal equality of safety, 
freedom, and dignity in our digital 
future, we need a universal approach 
to defining, upholding, and advancing 
digital rights – for everyone.
The Alliance for Universal Digital 
Rights (AUDRi) was formed in 2022  
by two international gender equality 
and advocacy organizations, Equality  
Now and Women Leading in AI.
We are calling for the adoption of a 
universal digital rights framework, 
rooted in human rights law and 
underpinned by an intersectional 
feminist, anti-discrimination analysis. 

Introducing 
our digital  
framework Nine principles 
for a future where 
everyone in the 
digital world can 
enjoy the right to 
safety, freedom 
and dignity.

UNIVERSAL  
AND EQUAL RIGHTS
 
Everyone has an equal right 
to protection, opportunity,  
and respect, including in  
the digital realm. 
01.Article 1 of the UN Declaration on 
Human Rights states that “all human 
beings are born free and equal in 
dignity and rights. ” This means that 
the rights of all members of the 
human family are equal, and every 
person must be respected, protected, 
and provided with an opportunity to 
fulfill their interests and realize their 
human rights.
Digital technologies and services 
provide historically discriminated-
against groups with new  
opportunities to overcome  
dominant societal, cultural,  
traditional, and mobility barriers. But if our digital selves are not 
afforded the same human rights as  
our physical selves, the very people 
who experience intersecting forms  
of discrimination and prejudice in 
the real world will continue to be 
subjugated and denied their human 
rights within the digital ecosystem, 
and be subjected to new and  
amplified forms of discrimination.
The systems and processes by which 
digital services and technologies are 
developed, accessed, and regulated 
must be underpinned by non-
discrimination and equality to ensure 
that our fundamental human rights 
remain universally upheld – including 
in the digital world.THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
  Everyone is equal before the law and entitled to  
equal protection of the law, including in the digital  
realm, its ecosystem, and the metaverse.
  Everyone is entitled to equal protection from all 
forms of discrimination, including, but not limited to, 
discrimination on the grounds of sex (including  
grounds related to pregnancy, childbirth, gender 
identity, intersex status, and sexual orientation), race, 
ethnicity, color , social or economic class, disability, 
religion (with the understanding that such protections 
do not extend to defending/ excusing discrimination 
against others on the grounds of sex and/ or gender 
equality), language, political opinion, national origin, 
descent, veteran status, genetic information, marital 
status, and age.
   Human rights, as envisaged in international and 
national laws, shall be interpreted with a gendered and 
intersectional lens to ensure that they are enforced 
equally and fairly in the digital realm, so as to address 
any gendered digital discrimination and inequality.
  Equality by design principles should be included at the 
design stage of algorithmic decision-making systems 
and digital technologies to prevent discrimination and 
harmful biases being amplified and/ or perpetuated.
  Everyone has the right to the 
protection of the data that 
concerns them – and to be able to 
understand, in very simple terms, 
how that data is processed.
  No one shall be subjected to 
arbitrary interference of this right, 
and any limitation of this right 
shall be reasonable, necessary, 
proportionate, and justifiable.
  Any processing of data shall be fair , 
lawful, and transparent, adhering 
to data processing principles set 
out in international norms and 
standards.
  Particular attention should be 
afforded to the structural issue of 
intimate privacy violations against 
women, girls, and people of 
marginalized genders.
  Everyone has a right to protection 
against unfettered forms of 
surveillance, including in places 
of work and education and during 
civic participation. The use of 
facial recognition or biometric 
technologies must be regulated, 
necessary, and proportional.
  Everyone has the right to 
encryption and online anonymity. 
Sharing of data with third parties, 
including law enforcement 
agencies and the private sector , 
must be limited to what is 
reasonable, necessary, and 
proportional.   Everyone has the right to control 
their digital legacy and to decide 
what happens with the publicly 
available information that concerns 
them after their death.
  Digital service providers must be 
held accountable as more than 
mere conduits for user-generated 
content, particularly that involving 
hate speech, incitement to cause 
harm, and/ or the exploitation and 
abuse of women, girls, and other 
discriminated-against groups and 
marginalized people.
  States must accept an obligation 
to safeguard citizens from online 
abuse, misogyny, and hate crime, 
including by conducting swift, 
cross-jurisdictional investigations 
and upholding the right of victims 
to obtain appropriate and holistic 
remedies.
  Protection from abuse should 
include all forms of online sexual 
exploitation and abuse, including 
sexual harassment, stalking 
and tracking, coercive control, 
technology-enabled sex trafficking, 
livestreaming of sexual abuse, child 
sexual abuse material, and image-
based sexual abuse, including 
through deepfake sex videos.PERSONAL SAFETY  
AND DATA PRIVACY
 
Everyone has a right to control 
information about themselves 
and to secure protection from 
digital harms.  
02.The right to privacy underpins our 
use and enjoyment of other human 
rights. It encompasses the right 
to privacy in family life, the home, 
and correspondence, and freedom 
from attacks on a person’s honor or 
reputation.
In the digital realm, the right to 
privacy is not just about the right 
to be left alone. With our personal 
data increasingly being extracted 
and analyzed to inform and fuel 
algorithmic decisions that affect  
every aspect of our lives, the right  
to privacy is also about protecting  
our rights to justice, dignity,  
and autonomy.Digital privacy is also about safety. 
The internet is rife with bullying 
and harassment, while the online 
exploitation and abuse of women, 
girls, and children has reached 
unprecedented global proportions. 
At the same time, digital technologies 
and services are increasingly being 
used for manipulation and suppression 
of dissent, including through the use  
of smart devices by domestic  
abusers to monitor and control 
women’s behavior .
The lack of recognition and 
enforceability of the digital right to 
privacy results in women, girls, and 
other discriminated-against groups 
and marginalized people lacking 
protection from – and redress for – 
serious harms to their careers, safety, 
and social freedom, as well as to their 
dignity, bodily integrity, and autonomy.
THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
  Everyone has the right not to be 
treated unfairly or be discriminated 
against – or disproportionately 
denied their rights – because 
of automated decisions made 
about them based solely on data 
collected or inferred from their 
digital footprint.
  Everyone, including women, girls, 
and other discriminated-against 
groups and marginalized people, 
should be able to exercise self-
determination in the digital age.
  Everyone has a right to the 
complete and up-to-date 
representation of their identity 
on the internet.
  Preventative measures and 
safeguards should be implemented 
to prevent unfair , biased, and 
arbitrary decisions being made 
about a person, and there should 
be meaningful transparency around 
the criteria used for decision-
making.
  A presumption of algorithmic bias 
should be considered, to better 
balance the burden of proof, and 
to encourage the adoption of bias 
mitigation tools and controls.  There should be no judicial or 
administrative order or decision 
that could significantly impact 
an individual based solely on the 
automated processing of personal 
and other data which has been 
collected to establish the profile  
or personality of that person.
  Equality by design principles, 
including human rights and gender 
rights impact assessments, 
should be incorporated into the 
development of any algorithmic 
decision-making systems or digital 
technologies prior to going to 
market, to prevent discrimination 
and harmful biases being amplified 
and/ or perpetuated.
  Inferences generated by big data 
should be limited to safeguard 
people’s autonomy of choice and 
freedom. Sensitive information 
should not be used to the detriment 
of the person, or to infer personal 
information, including their religion 
or sexual orientation.DIGIT AL SELF -
DETERMINA TION
 
Everyone has a right to  
exercise self-determination  
in the use of digital  
technologies.
03.The right to self-determination refers 
to our ability to fully exercise our 
agency in choosing our own destiny, 
including through freely determining 
our political status and pursuing 
our economic, social, and cultural 
development.
Digital technologies can be used not 
just to monitor and categorize, but also 
to influence. Vast amounts of digital 
data are used to train models that 
contain the same biases that exist in 
the real world, including those based 
on race, gender , and socioeconomic 
status. With predictive technologies 
increasingly supporting the creation 
of government policies about how 
public services and resources are 
accessed and allocated, such biases 
can interfere with people’s freedom of 
choice and affect their ability to make 
their own decisions. While historical data can be useful, 
for example, in facilitating the 
identification and understanding of 
trends on emerging social issues 
and in real-time crises, it is not 
neutral. Data represents society 
as it is, including its layers of social 
inequality and discrimination. If it is 
used uncritically and with no controls, 
it perpetuates existing oppression and 
leaves people – particularly women, 
girls, and other discriminated-against 
groups and marginalized people – 
less able to choose, challenge, or 
change their own destiny. Artificial 
intelligence and machine learning 
can also exaggerate existing biases, 
resulting in further discrimination and 
harms.
THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
DIGIT AL ACCESS  
FOR ALL 
 
Everyone has a right to  
access the digital realm and 
to be free to participate in  
digital life.
04.The full realization of human 
potential requires universal rights to 
education, to freedom of expression 
and information, to assembly and 
association, and to full participation 
in and enjoyment of economic, social, 
cultural, civil, and political life.
T o participate fully in the modern 
world, everyone requires equal 
access to the internet and digital 
technologies. However , around 3.7 
billion people – comprising nearly 
half of the world’s population – do 
not enjoy such access. People living 
in remote areas are less likely to 
use the internet than those in more 
urban areas, and people who face 
intersectional inequalities are more 
likely to be excluded from using digital 
technologies and services.This is an issue that particularly  
affects women, girls, and other 
discriminated-against groups and 
marginalized people, who are more 
vulnerable to coercive control and 
unequal power relationships. On 
average, women’s access to digital 
and mobile technology is about  
85% of the level for men, while 
globally, about 327 million fewer 
women than men have a smartphone 
and access to mobile internet. 
The ability to freely engage with 
the digital world is negatively 
affected by factors including 
misogyny, hate speech, identity theft, 
defamation, online sexual exploitation 
and harassment – all of which 
disproportionately affect women, 
girls, and other discriminated-against 
groups and marginalized people.THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
  Everyone has the right to participate in the digital realm 
and to access, regardless of their geographical location, 
universally available internet services and digital 
technology at an affordable price.
  States should enact policies promoting universal and 
equal access to the internet, including recognizing 
and addressing existing gender and intersectional 
inequalities. 
  States should enact policies prohibiting the arbitrary 
and deliberate slowing and/ or cutting off of the internet 
on any grounds, including public order or national 
security grounds.
   Interfaces, content, and applications must be designed 
inclusively to ensure accessibility for all, including 
people with physical, sensory, or cognitive disabilities, 
people who are not literate, and people who speak 
minority languages. The principle of inclusive design 
and the use of assistive technologies must be promoted 
and supported to allow persons with disabilities to 
benefit fully and on equal terms.
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION 
AND ASSOCIA TION
 
Everyone has a right to  
freedom of expression,  
peaceful assembly, and  
association online.
05.The right to free expression and 
association underpins the freedom to 
seek, receive, and impart information, 
and to associate freely for social, 
political, cultural, or other purposes.  
It is also related to rights to freedom 
of thought, conscience, and religion.
Online activities are considered 
expression, and so are protected 
under existing rights to free 
expression and association. However , 
this right is frequently infringed upon 
– both by governments and by private 
companies – for purported national 
security reasons and/ or through 
unevenly applied online content 
moderation policies and practices. Some forms of online expression 
are indeed harmful – harassment or 
stalking; the incitement of violence 
against others based on their race, 
religion, or gender; the generation or 
distribution of hate speech and mis/
disinformation. But ill-defined and 
unchecked infringement of the right to 
free expression has created a culture 
of censorship in which political dissent 
can be suppressed, and the voices of 
victims and survivors can be silenced.  Everyone has the right to hold opinions without 
interference, regardless of frontiers.
   Everyone has the right to seek, receive, and impart 
non-harmful and non-exploitative information freely, 
through any medium, including on the internet, without 
censorship or other arbitrary interference by the State, 
non-State actors, and private actors. 
   Everyone has the right to associate freely, including 
through and on the internet, for social, political, cultural, 
or other purposes.
   The internet and digital technologies must be protected 
from all attempts to silence women, girls, and other 
people from discriminated-against groups.
  Any restriction to the right to freedom of  
expression and association must be provided by law  
and must be necessary, proportionate, and justifiable  
in a democratic society.Cont.
These complexities mean that 
mechanisms must be put into place 
to ensure intersectional, feminist-
informed application of the right 
to free expression and association 
within the digital realm, and that any 
limitation of this right is necessary, 
proportionate, and justifiable.The right to digital freedom of 
expression is of particular relevance 
to women and girls, who frequently 
face gender-based violence and 
harassment online, including via 
intimate image sexual abuse intended 
to silence, shame, and oppress. 
This includes politicians, journalists, 
and other communication workers 
contributing to public debate on the 
internet. Without adequate protection, 
all women risk being excluded from 
full and equal participation online.
THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
SECURE, ST ABLE AND  
RESILIENT NETWORKS
Everyone has a right to  
benefit from secure, stable,  
and resilient digital networks 
and technologies.
06.Existing international human rights 
law dictates that everyone has an 
equal right to personal and social 
protection and liberty, to freedom 
from exploitation and surveillance, 
and to a social and international 
order that enables maintenance and 
improvement of quality of life.
As a global public resource, the 
internet should be a reliable and 
trustworthy network for everyone.  
But the security of the internet 
and other digital networks is often 
undermined by unlawful surveillance, 
monitoring, and interception of 
users’ private online activity or 
communications, either for individual 
or commercial gain or to suppress 
political dissent. Secure, stable, resilient digital 
networks keep people safe and 
protect their digital rights by enabling 
everyone, from children and teachers 
to journalists and whistleblowers, 
to lawfully express themselves and 
access information online without 
fear of retribution. With the digital 
world transcending both national and 
jurisdictional borders, achieving this 
stability requires collaboration across 
the public, private, and civil sectors.  
It also requires protection from 
services and protocols that threaten 
security and from abuse of data and 
identities.
Fears about digital safety and security 
are disproportionately preventing 
women, girls, and other discriminated-
against groups and marginalized 
people from accessing and enjoying 
the internet. This, in turn, is limiting 
their ability to realize their rights and 
to engage in the digital economy. 
participation online.THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
   Everyone has the right to a secure, stable, and resilient 
internet.
  The rights to liberty and security must be respected, 
protected, and fulfilled online and through the use of 
digital technologies. 
  These rights must not be infringed upon or used to 
infringe other rights,in the online environment or 
through digital technologies. 
  Network security must be guaranteed in the public 
interest, ensuring infrastructure integrity and protection 
from external attacks and in the interest of individuals.
  Inviolability of digital technologies should be 
maintained. The IT systems and devices of every person 
and the freedom and confidentiality of their electronic 
information and communications are inviolable. 
Exceptions and limitations should be exercised only 
when it is necessary and proportionate to do so.
LINGUISTIC AND  
CUL TURAL DIVERSITY 
Everyone has a right to use  
any language of their choice  
to create and share digital  
information.
07.Linguistic and cultural diversity 
enriches the development of society. 
All individuals and communities have 
the right to use their own language 
– or any language of their choice – 
to create, share, and engage with 
information and knowledge without 
being exposed to harm.
As more people shift their lives 
online, the lack of linguistic and 
cultural diversity in digital spaces 
is becoming increasingly apparent. 
Minority languages are often excluded 
from digital contexts in favor of 
eurocentric languages such as English. 
Meanwhile, software and applications 
are overwhelmingly developed for 
the so-called majority, resulting in 
limited moderation of online content in 
other languages and the subsequent 
exposure of users of those languages 
to online harm.Internet accessibility is more than 
the ability to obtain a device and a 
wireless connection, yet there is 
currently no requirement for global 
digital platforms and services to 
reflect the linguistic and cultural 
diversity that exists in the real world. 
While some languages, such as 
Hindi (India) and Mandarin (China), 
are gaining both dominance and 
representation in societal and digital 
contexts alike, other languages that 
are dominant in physical spaces, 
such as Swahili (East Africa) and 
Y oruba (Nigeria), remain woefully 
underrepresented online.
Feminist activism shows us that the 
ability to speak one’s language is 
key to seeking refuge and breaking 
isolation. It is, therefore, crucial that 
the erasure of the languages and 
cultures of marginalized groups in 
the real world is not replicated in the 
digital realm.THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
  Everyone has the right to access culturally and 
linguistically diverse knowledge and information in 
an accessible format, where this can be reasonably 
accommodated.
  T echnical and policy innovation should be encouraged 
to facilitate the diversity, accessibility, and plurality of 
culture on the internet and in digital spaces.
  National, regional, and local administrations, 
governments, and publicly-funded international 
organizations must ensure transparency and 
accountability by placing any publicly relevant 
information they produce and manage in the public 
domain.
  They should ensure that this information is disseminated 
and made available on the internet and in digital spaces 
using compatible and open formats and is accessible 
to people with particular access challenges, such as 
persons with a disability, those using older computers, 
mobile devices, or with slow internet connections.
   Digital technologies and the internet should reflect and 
respect the linguistic and cultural diversity of the world.
  T echnical development must encourage  
linguistic diversity on the internet and  
simplify the exchange of information  
across language barriers.

UNIVERSAL ST ANDARDS  
AND REGULA TION
Everyone has an equal right  
to benefit from the  
development and use of digital  
technology.
08.Everyone in the world is equal before 
the law. We all have an equal right to 
contribute to and benefit from the 
development of our shared society, 
and we are all, without discrimination, 
entitled to equal protection and equal 
enjoyment of our human rights.
The digital realm has become 
so ubiquitous as to be virtually 
inseparable from the real world. 
As such, the architecture and 
development of digital networks, 
technologies, and services must  
be based on binding, universal 
standards that adopt a human- 
rights based approach. Currently, the internet and digital 
technologies are predominantly 
regulated and governed through 
industry standards and voluntary 
codes, which are driven by the 
private sector and lack transparency, 
coherence, and formal government 
oversight. This has encouraged 
unhealthy competition and resulted 
in uneven and inadequate protection 
of users’ rights, exacerbated by the 
inability under current frameworks 
to hold digital service providers and 
platforms liable for illegal or harmful 
user-generated content. This has 
serious implications for the safety, 
freedom, and dignity of women, girls, 
and other discriminated-against 
groups and marginalized people,  
who are routinely exploited, abused, 
and harassed online by perpetrators 
acting with impunity.
  Digital technologies and architecture shall be based on 
binding, open standards that ensure inclusion and equal 
opportunity for all. Content created and shared through 
the internet or digital networks shall be moderated 
based on human rights principles. 
  States shall mandate technology companies, 
companies that develop digital technologies, and digital 
and internet service providers to adopt human rights-
based approaches in the development of their content 
moderation policies and practices.
  The internet’s architecture, communication systems, 
and document and data formats shall be based on 
open standards that ensure complete interoperability, 
universality, integrity, openness, inclusion, and equal 
opportunity for all.
  Notified bodies and national committees should meet 
diversity targets in relation to representation, supported 
by governments, and should put into place processes 
and funds to enable wider stakeholder participation.
   States should take steps to minimize the energy 
consumption of the internet and digital technologies 
and minimize harm from the extraction of natural 
resources to fuel new technologies.Cont.
Similarly, without regulation, the 
inevitable environmental impact of 
the construction and maintenance 
of digital infrastructure, and of the 
extraction of natural resources 
for use in digital technologies, are 
disproportionately felt by women, 
girls, and Indigenous communities.  
A new regulatory framework is 
required to provide clarity and guidance on the expected behavior 
and liability of digital technology 
companies. It is imperative that this 
framework is rooted in a feminist, 
intersectional analysis and developed 
alongside women, girls, and other 
discriminated-against groups and 
marginalized people to ensure their 
needs are met instead of codifying 
inequality into best practice and 
regulatory conformity.
THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
GOOD DIGIT AL  
GOVERNANCE 
Everyone has the right to  
multilateral, democratic  
oversight of the internet and 
digital technologies.
09.In a democratic society, every  
citizen has a right to live and be 
governed within a transparent 
national and international system  
and a right to enjoy the freedom to 
access and participate in  
public life.
The internet was created with the 
utopian vision of an accessible, 
inclusive society that everyone in the 
world could inhabit democratically. 
But decades later , commercial 
interests have taken over , and far from 
being a space of freedom, the internet 
has become rife with misogyny, 
violence, and hate. Unchecked 
development of digital technologies 
and networks has negatively impacted 
women, girls, and other discriminated-
against groups and marginalized 
people.New forms of binding governance and 
participation need to be established 
for the digital realm to ensure better 
protection of our rights and freedoms 
to both safety and privacy, and 
to provide more effective access 
to recourse where infringements 
occur . The input of governments, 
technology companies, human rights 
organizations, civil society actors, and 
victims/survivors is needed to uphold 
and expand human rights to the fullest 
extent possible.THE DIGIT AL PRINCIPLES
   Internet governance should be multilateral, transparent, 
and democratic, with the full involvement of all relevant 
stakeholders, including governments, the private sector , 
civil society, and the people most negatively impacted – 
including women, girls, and other discriminated-against 
groups and marginalized people.
  All decision-making processes related to the 
governance and development of the digital space 
should be open and accessible at international, regional, 
and national levels.
  International human rights standards, the rule of law, 
and social justice must form the legal and normative 
foundations upon which the internet is operated, 
governed, and regulated. 
  There must be recourse for illegal interference and 
violations of human rights in the digital sphere. This shall 
happen in a transparent and multilateral manner based 
on principles of openness, inclusive participation, and 
accountability.
www.audri.org 
hello@audri.orgContact us
twitter .com/ AUDRights 
linkedin.com/ company / AUDRi