1 | Page  
  
A Science Chapter  
Version of 30 April 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted by:  
Declan.kirrane@iscintelligence.com  
ISC Intelligence in Science  
WhatsApp +32494346040  
https://iscintelligence.com/  
https://sciencesu mmitunga.com/  
 
  
2 | Page  
 1. Point of Departure  3 
2. Introduction  3 
3. Unity of Science  6 
4. How digital scienc e Supports the UN Global Digital Compact  8 
5. Data protection regulations and their impact on digital science  9 
6. How will the data bias impact women and indigenous people impact digital s cience, and what 
can be done to overcome this?  11 
7. Digital technologies are essential for healt hcare delivery.  12 
8. Biodiversity  13 
Contributing Organizations  15 
 
 
  
3 | Page  
 1. Point of Departure  
 
Following the political  declaration adopted at the occasion of the United Nations’ 
75th anniversary  in September 2020, the UN Secretary -General in September 2021 
released the Our Common Agenda  policy. The Common Agenda includes a proposal 
for a Global Digital Compact to be agreed upon at the UN Summit of the Future in 
September 2024. This will result from a stakeholder engagement process involving 
governments, the United Nations system, the private sector (including tech 
companies), civil society, grass -roots organisations, academia, and individuals, 
including women and youth.  
 
The Global Digital Compa ct is expected to “outline shared principles for an open, free 
and secure digital future for all”. The Common Agenda report suggests issues that it 
might cover the following:  
1. Digital connectivity;  
2. Excellence in digital data collection, aggregation, interoperability and 
management;  
3. Avoiding Internet fragmentation;  
4. Providing people with options as to how their data is used;  
5. Application of human rights online;  
6. Promoting a trustworthy Internet by introducing accountability criteria for 
discr imination and misleading content.  
 
A background note on the Global Digital Compact is available here . 
 
2. Introduction  
 
 
United Nations Member States adopted a Declaration on the Commemoration of the 
Seventy -Fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (A/RES/75/1), which contains the 
following pledge:  
“We will improve digital cooperation. Digital technologies 
have profoundly transformed society. They offer 
4 | Page  
 unprecedented opportunities and new challenges. When 
improperly or maliciously used, they can fuel divisions 
within and between countries, increase i nsecurity, 
undermine human rights, and exacerbate inequality. 
Shaping a shared vision of digital cooperation and a digital 
future that shows the full potential for beneficial technology 
usage, and addressing digital trust and security, must 
continue to be a priority as our world is now more than ever 
relying on digital tools for connectivity and social -economic 
prosperity. Digital technologies have the potential to 
accelerate the realisation of the 2030 Agenda. We must 
ensure safe and affordable digital acc ess for all. The United 
Nations can provide a platform for all stakeholders to 
participate in such deliberations.  
 
Digital science is an interdisciplinary field that combines computer science, 
mathematics, and other related disciplines to develop innovativ e approaches for 
analysing and modelling complex  data sets and data sys tems, including natural, social, 
and technical systems. Digital science is based on collecting, analysing, and 
interpreting large data sets generated by various sources, such as sensors, simulations, 
experiments, and surveys. Nevertheless, science interpre tation entails an additional 
step requiring the construction of logical scientific arguments that explain the data, 
and validation mechanisms, including scientific knowledge and individual expertise. 
The emergence of synthetic data is another important inn ovative development to 
support research and development in healthcare and other sectors facilitating the 
privacy and security of individuals.  
 
Digital science is essential for our future because it revolutionises many aspects of our 
lives. Here are a few w ays digital science is important:  
- Advancing scientific research: Digital science enables researchers to analyse 
vast amounts of data and discover patterns and correlations that were 
previously difficult or impossible to detect, especially in electronic hea lth 
records (enhancing the use and utility of real -world evidence). This leads to 
breakthroughs in genetics, neuroscience, and climate science;  
5 | Page  
 - Improving healthcare: Digital scien ce facilitates healthcare transformation by 
enabling doctors and researchers to anal yse patient data to enhance existing 
services, develop new services and products and develop personalised 
treatments. This can lead to better outcomes and lower costs.  
- Enhancing education: Essential to sustainable healthcare systems are both 
digital  and health literacy.  This literacy is needed for everyone, including 
healthcare professionals (both for qualification and continuing education), 
patients, carers, policymakers and citizens.  Digital science is making education 
more accessible and personal ised. For example, it enables online learning 
platforms to offer customised lessons and assessments to individual students 
based on their learning styles and progress.  
- Transforming business and industry: Digital science drives innovation in 
finance, transp ortation, and manufacturing by enabling companies and public 
sector governments and organisations to analyse data and optimise their 
operations.  
- Enhancing population health data: Digital data can be collected, aggregated and 
combined (especially with non -clinical data such as social determinants of 
health)  at a highly granular level to create new insights and fuel greater levels 
of precision or personalised medicine.  
- Digital science improves our understanding of ecosystems, their functions, and 
the provis ion of the services enabling underpinning data and knowledge for 
decisions and actions urgently needed for conservation.  
 
Digital technology has revolutionised how scientific research is conducted, 
disseminated, and shared. One of the key benefits is that it enables open science, a 
movement to open the processes of scientific knowledge creation, evaluation, and 
communication, as defined in the ‘ UNESCO Recommendation on Open Scienc e’. This 
openness fosters seamless collaboration among researchers from different parts of 
the world, who can work together to solve complex problems that require diverse 
expertise. In addition, open science allows for t he meaningful involvement of society 
in scientific research by providing opportunities for citizen science projects and other 
forms of public engagement. This contributes to a more equitable and inclusive 
scientific enterprise.  
 
6 | Page  
  
3. Unity of Science  
 
If implemented correctly and systematically, d igital science has the potential to help 
achieve unity of science by enabling interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary 
collaboration and providing tools for data sharing, analysis, and integration.  
One of the chall enges of achieving unity of science is that different disciplines often 
use other  methods, theories, and languages, making  it difficult to communicate and 
collaborate across disciplines. However, digital science tools such as data visualisation , 
artificial  intelligence and machine learning, and network analysis can help to bridge 
these gaps by enabling researchers to work with large and complex datasets and 
identify patterns and relationships that might be difficult to detect using traditional 
methods. Neve rtheless, social injustice is a major threat, if digital science is used 
adequately and would increase social gaps even further, especially in underdeveloped 
countries.  
Digital science can also promote data sharing and collaboration across disciplines and 
national borders  by providing open -access data repositories, such as the Global 
Biodiversity Information Facility and the Ocean Biogeographic Information System. 
These r epositories enable researchers worldwide from different disciplines to access 
and analyse  data from various  sources, which can lead to new insights and discoveries. 
This is particularly useful in addressing the national and transboundary challenges 
associa ted with implementing the post -2020 global biodiversity framework and 
achieving a nature -positive world by 2030.  
Data science can break down the traditional silos between academic disciplines and 
industry sectors to achieve “data in all policies” for evide nce-based policies, 
innovations and solutions. This is illustrated in the “Health in All Policies “ initiative 
(https://healthyeurope.eu/ ) and in the Health & Prosperity agenda d eveloped in 
Northern Ireland.  
Digital science can promote interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary collaboration by 
providing platforms for communication and cooperation , such as online forums, wikis, 
and social media. These platforms can engage  researchers  and non-academic 
practitioners from different disciplines and institutions in other  countries to share 
ideas, best prac tices, collaborate on projects, and build new networks.  
7 | Page  
 Overall, if applied proper ly across geographies, digital science has the potential to help 
achieve unity of science, increasing  the capacities of less favoured/underdeveloped 
countries by providing new tools for equitable interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary 
collaboration, knowledge co -production,  and data sharing. By partnering  with 
decision -makers , civil society, and the private sector to co -produce tools and 
knowledge, novel digital science advances are more likely to have a beneficial impact 
on society.  Interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary teams  can make discoveries and 
gain a deeper understanding of the world around us by working together across 
disciplines and sectors, using digital science tools to integrate and analyse data and 
co-create decision support tools. This  opens the do or to discover ies and 
breakthroughs.  
 
 
  
8 | Page  
  
4. How digital science Supports the UN Global 
Digital Compact  
 
Digital science can support the UN Global Digital Compact by providing tools and 
approaches to help achieve its goals. The UN Global Digital Compact is a call to action  
for companies to align their digital strategies with the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), which aim to eradicate poverty, protect the planet, and promote 
prosperity for all in all dimensions. Here are some ways in which digital science can 
support  the UN Global Digital Compact:  
 
1. Big data analytics: Digital science can enable companies to analyse  large 
datasets to identify patterns, trends, and insights that can inform their business 
strategies and help them achieve the SDGs while maint aining a posi tive 
balance . 
2. Artificial intelligence: Digital science can help companies to develop AI 
solutions that can automate tasks, reduce costs, and improve efficiency, while 
also promoting sustainable practices.  
3. Internet of Things: Digital science can enable comp anies to use IoT devices to 
collect data on their operations and environmental impacts, which can inform 
their sustainability strategies.  
4. Blockchain: Digital science can support blockchain technology to track and 
verify sustainable practices in supply chai ns and promote transparency and 
accountability. Blockchain is also an energy -intensive technique with 
significant environmental impacts, which needs to be acknowledged.  
5. Digital education: Digital science can promote digital education and training, 
equippin g workers with the necessary skills  to contribute to sustainable 
development.  
6. Overall, digital science can play a key role in supporting the UN Global Digital 
Compact by providing tools and approaches to help companies align their 
digital strategies with t he SDGs and promote sustainable practices.  
  
9 | Page  
  
5. Data protection regulations and their impact on 
digital science  
 
Data protection regulations can significantly impact and facilitate digital science 
because they govern the collection, use, and sharing of personal data, which is often 
used in scientific research. Here are some ways in which data protection regulations 
can impact digital science:  
1. Trust: Data Protection regulations have a fundamental role in striking a balance 
between protecting essential hum an rights and facilitating the development of 
science and healthcare innovation for the common good of mankind, also a 
human right. This balance explains the benefits to citizens of data sharing, 
especially health data while preventing inappropriate and un acceptable uses. 
Data Regulation is as much about ensuring the development and facilitation of 
trust by all in data sharing as it is about outlawing certain data uses.  
2. Consent: Data protection regulations typically require that individuals give 
informed co nsent for their personal data to be collected and used in research. 
It als o provides for the right to have your data deleted.  This means that 
researchers must obtain explicit consent from study participants, which may  be 
not only  time -consuming for all parties concerned but also often inappropriate 
and intrusive and ultimately may limit the scope of the research required to 
achieve the SDGs.  
3. Anonymisation : Data protection regulations often require that personal data be 
anonymised  before it is used in resea rch. This can help to protect individuals' 
privacy and prevent the misuse of their data, but it can also make it more 
difficult for researchers to analyse  the data and draw meaningful conclusio ns, 
especially for rare diseases. It also excludes any possibil ity of providing shared 
benefits such as the return of results. Anonymisation is potentially 
counterproductive to the integration of data for analysis and advances in areas 
such as precision medicine which requires analysis of different data types to 
ident ify potential treatments precisely. Technical advances and individuals 
publishing more data about themselves also makes anonymisation increasingly 
difficult in practice.  
10 | Page  
 4. Data sharing: Data protection regulations can impact research data sharing  
between res earchers and institutions. Researchers must ensure that any 
personal data they share is done so in compliance with their speci fic data 
protection regulations, which can make it more difficult to collaborate across 
institutions and countries as regulations differ, not only in the mechanisms and 
obligations required for sharing but even in the interpretation of terminologies . 
Data o wnership also has impacts that need to be considered.  
5. Data security: Data protection regulations require that personal data and 
especially  sensitive data , be kept secure and protected from unauthorised  
access. Researchers  must ensure that their data handling procedures are robust 
and have adequate measures to prevent data breaches and cyberattacks.  
6. Overall, data protection regulati ons can impact digital science by limiting  
personal data  collection, use, and sharing. While these regulations are essential  
for protecting individuals' privacy and preventing data misuse , they can also 
create challenges for researchers who need to access and analyse  data to 
advance scientific research. As a result, it is essential  for researchers to work 
within the framework of data protection regulations and to ensure that they 
comply with all relevant laws and regulations.  
7. Data regulation is the competen cy of Member States, but it is in the best 
interests of all citizens and society to avoid unnecessarily complicated and 
diverse forms of regulation and governance which preclude scientific advances 
that would help fulfil the objectives of the SDGs. Data an d healthcare know no 
borders, and the UN Global Digital Compact has the opportunity to foster a set 
of common principles for Global Data regulation and governance based on real 
consultation and trust at its heart.  
8. Strong and fair governance systems for all  data use or sharing can massively 
increase overall levels of trust and confidence that privacy is protected wherever 
necessary.  
 
  
11 | Page  
  
6. How will the data bias impact women and 
indigenous people impact digital science, and 
what can be done to overcome this?  
 
Data bias against women can significantly impact digital science by perpetuating and 
amplifying gender inequalities in research and society. Here are some ways in which 
data bias against women can impact digital science:  
Research design: Data bias can lead to research questions and methodologies that are 
biased against women, leading to a need for more representation and data in key 
research areas.  
- Data collection: Data bias can lead to incomplete and inaccurate data about 
women, impacting  scientific conclusions and developing  policies and 
interventions.  
- Data analysis: Data bias can lead to incorrect or incomplete scientific 
conclusions , further perp etuating  gender stereotypes and inequalities.  
 
Taking proactive steps to overcome data bias against women in digital science is 
important. Here are some potential approaches:  
1. Address unconscious biases: Researchers should be aware of their own 
unconscious biases and strive to address them in their research design, data 
collection, and data analysis.  
2. Increase representation: Researchers should seek to increase the 
representation of women in research studies and data sets and ensure that they 
are accurately r epresented and included in research across fields.  
3. Encourage women's leadership in research: Women's issues are generally 
better addressed with women in the leadership of research projects, including 
random clinical trials (of both animals and humans) and activities. A concerted 
effort must encourage women's leadership in research activities.  
4. Promote interdisciplinary collaboration: Researchers from diverse fields and 
backgrounds should collaborate on research projects to help identify potential 
sources of  bias and develop more accurate and comprehensive data sets.  
12 | Page  
 5. Increase awareness and education: Educational programs and awareness 
campaigns can help to raise awareness of data bias against women and promote 
strategies to overcome it.  
6. The development of syn thetic women’s data sets offers another opportunity to 
reduce gender data bias.  
 
By promoting inclusion and diversity in research, researchers can develop more 
accurate and comprehensive data sets that can help to promote gender equality and 
address issues  of inequality and bias in research and society.  
 
 
7. Digital technologies are essentia l for healthcare 
delivery.  
 
Digital technologies are increasingly important for healthcare delivery because they 
have the potential to improve patient outcomes, increase access to care, and lower 
costs. Here are some specific reasons why digital technologies are important for 
healthcare delivery:  
1. Telemedicine: Digital technologies such as videoconferencing and remote 
monitoring can enable patients to receive medic al care from their homes, 
which can be particularly beneficial for patients in rural or remote areas. 
Telemedicine can also reduce the need for  in-person visits, reducing carbon 
emissions and pollution, lowering costs and increasing care access and 
improvi ng patient convenience and experience . 
2. Electronic health records (EHRs): Digital technologies can support the 
creation and management of electronic health records, improving patient 
safety and enabling  healthcare providers to access patient information qui ckly 
and easily.  
3. Data analyti cs: Digital technologies can enable healthcare providers to analyse 
large datasets in their EHRs to identify patterns and trends in patient health, 
which can inform treatment decisions and improve outcomes as well as lead to 
new products and services.  
13 | Page  
 4. Digital technologies can support the increase of health literacy across society, 
empowering citizens to greater independence, quality of life, well -being and 
fewer years of ill health.  
5. Mobile health (mHealth): Digital technologies can support the development of 
mobile health apps and devices, enabling  patients to monitor their health and 
communicate with healthcare providers more easily.  
6. Precision  medicine: Digital technologies can support the development of 
precision medicine, whic h involves tailoring medical treatment to individual 
patients based on their genetics, lifestyle, and medical history.  
7. Overall, digital technologies are important for healthcare delivery because 
they can improve patient outcomes, increase access to care, and lower costs. 
By embracing digital technologies, healthcare providers can enhance the 
quality and efficiency of healthcare delivery and improve the overall health of 
population s. Other sectors do not describe their services as digital, for 
example , financial services do not refer to mobile or digital banking, just 
banking. The challenge for healthcare is to become truly and universally 
digitally enabled when it delivers health services, not digital health, mhealth, 
ehealth or connected health servi ces. 
 
 
8. Biodiv ersity 
 
Digital science has the potential to support biodiversity conservation by providing new 
tools for data collection, analysis, and management. By combining digital science, and 
local communities empowerment, with existing conservation me thods, particularly 
those of Indigenous  peoples, we can develop more effective strategies to protect and 
conserve the Earth's biodiversity:  
 
 
1. Data collection: Digital science tools such as remote sensing, drones, and 
camera traps can collect data on biodiversity. This data can be used to monitor 
changes in biodiversity over time and track the success of conservation efforts. 
14 | Page  
 With data science, d ata collection may not be supported by national 
geographical borders.  
2. Data analysis: Digital science enables the analysis of large datasets to identify 
patterns, such as spatial and temporal distribution. This information can be 
used to inform conservatio n planning and management.  
3. Modelling: Digital science tools can be used to create models of ecosystems and 
simulate the effects of different management scenarios. This can help decision -
makers assess the potential impacts of proposed actions before 
impleme ntation.  
4. Citizen science: Digital science can support citizen science initiatives, which 
involve members of the public in collecting and analysing data on biodiversity. 
This can engage communities in conservation efforts and raise awareness of 
biodiversity  issues.  
5. Mapping: Digital science tools can create detailed maps of ecosystems and 
identify areas of high biodiversity, which guide conservation efforts and protect 
important habitats.  
6. Living things data pattern determination: Digital science affords the 
opportunity to see the genetic/epigenetic/genomic similarities and differences 
in all living things on the planet to appreciate better how to thrive together in 
the future.  
 
  
15 | Page  
 Contributing Organizations  
 
African Astronomical Society (AfAS) Africa  
Aga Khan University, Kenya  
ARC -Net research centre, University of Verona, Italy  
Biobanking and Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure, BBMRI,  
COST Research Programme, Belgium  
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Ghana  
Council for Scientific and I ndustrial Research, India  
ECHAlliance, Belgium  
ImiBio, Argentina  
Inter -American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI)  
LifeWarch ERIC Biodiversity Research Infrastructure, Spain  
Makerere University, Uganda  
Medical Research Council, South Africa  
National Research Foundation, South Africa  
The Digital Health Society, Ireland  
The European Topic Centre on Spatial Analysis and Synthesis (ETC -UMA), Spain  
University College, Dublin, Ireland  
Zhejiang University International  Business School  (ZIBS ), China  