1 Input  from  the Internet  Governance  Coalition   
for the Global  Digital  Compact   
 
 Introduction  
 The Internet  Governance  Coalition  respectfully  submits  this input  for the ongoing  
consultation  on priorities  for the Global  Digital  Compact  (GDC).     
The Internet  Governance  Coalition  (Coalition ) is an industry  group  representing  
companies  from  across  the Internet  ecosystem.   Members  include  Amazon,  AT&T,  Inc., 
Comcast  NBCUniversal,  Google  LLC,  Intelsat,  Meta,  Microsoft  Corporation,  NCTA  – The 
Internet  & Television  Association,  The Walt  Disney  Company,  Twilio,  and Verizon  
Communications.   The Coalition  advo cates  and supports  policies  that ensure  an open,  free, 
global,  interoperable,  reliable,  and secure  Internet  as the underlying  foundation  for sustainable  
economic  and social  development.  
The Coalition  recognizes  the transformative  importance  of the global  drive  to achieve  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals , and the powerful  role that the Internet  and digital  
communications  play in reaching  those  objectives.   We also acknowledge  that important  work  
remains  to ensure  human  rights  principles  are woven  into the fabric  of the Sustainable  
Development  Goals .  The Coalition  and its members  individually  are deeply  involved  as private  
sector  participants  in the goal of achieving  universal  connectivity  and helping  to develop  
evidence -based  public  policies  to facilitate  this shared  goal.  The Coalition  commends  the UN 
for its work  on digital  cooperation  and for underscor ing the importance  of human  rights  in a 
digital  world.   The Coalition  is pleased  to be a participant  in development  of the GDC  and 
strongly  suppor ts a continued  global  commitment  to the multistakeholder  model  of Internet  
governance .     
We have  provided  input  below  on several  key issues  based  on the private  sector’s  role 
throughout  the digital  ecosystem  and our experience  in global  Internet  governance  policymaking,  
dating  back  to the historic  World  Summit  on the Information  Society  initia tive.  The policies  
recommended  below  are important  to achieving  the Sustainable  Development  Goals.   
The Value  of a Multistakeholder  Approach   
A thriving  Internet  has depended  upon  a transparent  governance  structure  representative  
of all stakeholders.   The existing  multistakeholder  model  for international  Internet  governance  –
and reliance  on private  sector  investment  and innovation  – has enabled  the economic,  social,  and 
political  developments  of today.   This decentralized  structure  has allowed  individuals  worldwide  
to access  information  and services,  to connect  and communicate,  to share  knowledge  and ideas,  
and to enjoy  greater  protection  of human  rights.   By offering  new possibilities  for entrepreneurial  
creativity,  the Internet  has become  a powerful  engin e for technological  innovation,  economic  
growth,  and the preservation  and promotion  of cultural  diversity,  especially  in the developing  
world.  
The Coalition  encourages  the wide  use of the existing  multistakeholder  approach  in both 
the process  and the substance  of the GDC,  including  as a model  for the development  of global  
2 and member  state policies  to promote  the open,  distributed,  and interconnected  nature  of the 
Internet.   Given  the technical  complexity  of the Internet,  a broad  array of stakeholders , including  
governments,  the private  sector,  the Internet  technical  community,  academia,  and civil society , 
should  be included  through  an open  and collaborative  multistak eholder  approach .  The quality  of 
Internet  governance  and other  policy decisions  increases  when  diverse  stakeholders  are 
welcomed  and able to consistently  participate.    
In addition,  there  can be particular  benefits  to regulators  and other  government  officials  
in developing  countries  where  government s may face certain  capacity  constraints .  The 
multistakeholder  system  can provide  additional  expertise  and even  find potential  consensus  on 
policy  recommendations  when  ultimately  adopted.   This collaboration  in a multistakeholder  
environment  could  allow  governments  to cover  a wider  scope  of issues  and act more  quickly.   To 
that end, we also encourage  the GDC  to reference  or link to ongoing  multistake holder  initiatives  
on related  issues  as to avoid  duplication  of efforts  and ensure  that stakeholders  have  the 
bandwidth  to meaningfully  contribute.   
The Private  Sector  as a Partner  in Achieving  Governmental  Connectivity  and New 
Technologies  Goals  
 Along  with the multistakeholder  framework,  the existing  reliance  on private  sector  
investment  and innovation  has enabled  the economic,  social,  and political  developments  of 
today.   The Internet  and digital  communications  drive  the global  economy.   An ITU study  shows 
that “a 1 per cent increase  in fixed  broadband  penetration  increases  gross  domestic  product  
(GDP)  in a country  by 0.08 per cent,  while  a 1 per cent increase  in mobile  broadband  penetration  
increases  GDP  by 0.15 per cent. ”1  In developing  countries  and rural  areas,  the Internet  enables  
electronic  commerce  and telehealth  services,  support  for small  and medium -sized  enterprises , 
modernized  business  services,  distance  learning,  social  and political  engagement,  government  
services  and public  safety  information,  as well as much  more.   National  plans  for bringing  
Internet  connectivity  to every  citizen  normally  expect  most  of the investment  to come  from  the 
private  sector,  creating  informal  or formal  public -private  partnerships.    
The examples  in the Annex  of commitments  made  by Coalition  members  in the ITU’s 
Partner2Connect  Digital  Coalition  demonstrate  the many  ways  in which  the private  sector  is a 
vital collaborative  participant  in the digital  ecosystem.   These  companies  are actively  putting  
resources  into all parts  of the digital  ecosystem,  often  as important  sources  of capital  that can 
help make  national  connectivity  plans  a reality  and otherwise  advance  the Sustainable  
Development  Goals.   
  
 
1 Global  Connectivity  Report  2022,  ITU Development  Sector,  at 3 (2022),  available  at https://www.itu.int/itu -
d/reports/statistics/global -connectivity -report -2022/ .  
3 Forward -looking  Approaches  to Regulatory  Policy  
The Coalition  encourages  a focus  on non-duplicative  approaches  to regulation  and policy  
that will attract  investment  and encourage  innovation , while  still preserving  trust and security .  A 
facilitative  policy  and regulatory  environment  includes  protections  for freedom  of expression,  
privacy,  access  to information,  and intellectual  property , and is supplemented  by public  and 
private  sector  support  for digital  literacy  and digital  skills  initiatives.   This sets the stage  for 
citizens  to capitalize  on the potential  for digital  technologies  to improve  their lives.   Industry  is 
continuing  to develop  and find new applications  for transformative  technologies  and services,  
including  higher -speed  and more  ubiquitous  Internet  connectivity , artificial  intelligence,  the 
Internet  of Things,  content,  applications,  services,  and blockchain.   The policies  that 
governments  adopt  will have a profound  effect  on the pace and path of innovation  of those  and 
future  innovative  technologies  and services.   
Policies  and regulations  that promote  trusted  cross -border  data flows  are particularly  
critical  to ensuring  a global  and open  Internet,  fostering  productivity  and innovation  across all 
sectors,  encouraging  competition,  making  progress  towards  the Sustainable  Development  Goals, 
and bolstering  the enjoyment  of democracy  and human  rights.   The global  Internet  is 
increasingly  at risk of fragmenting  and is under  threat  as a result  of national  restrictions  that seek 
to control  citizens’  access  to information  and stifle  freedom  of expression , data localization  laws,  
and restrictions  on international  data flows.   The GDC  should  commit  to fortifying  the global  
approach  to Internet  governance  that promotes  free flows  of data,  encryption,  and rights  to 
freedom  of expression  and privacy  online.   After  all, the global  Internet  is built on the principle  
of openness,  and cross -border  data flows  are at the heart  of that founding  promise.   
The GDC  should  not be seen as a venue  to produce  detailed  digital  regulations.   Instead,  
it should  help to establish  forward -looking , interoperable  international  frameworks  for 
approaches  to issues  where  appropriate,  thereby  creating  models  for processes  that will be 
equally  useful  when  future  policy  issues  of global  importance  arise  and evolve.   The GDC  should  
encourage  the interoperability  of frameworks  to promote  the free flow of data and oppose  
protectionist  data localization  measures  and restrictions  on data flows.   Adoption  of detailed  
rules  at a global  level  runs the risk of inadvertently  chilling  the benefits  of innovation  and 
quickly  becoming  outdated.   Such  model  processes  should  include  methods  for robust  
multistakeholder  engagement.   Global  policymaking  should  also underscore  the importance  of 
collaboration  and interoperability.  
In sum,  continued  innovation  and expansion  in global  connectivity  require  policies  that 
promote  private  sector  investment,  and foster  the long-term growth  of the Internet  economy,  
rather  than chilling  investment  and innovation  through  heavy  regulation,  resulting  in restrictive  
access  to information  and services.   The Coalition  encourages  a forward -looking,  holistic,  
balanced  approach  that enables  the development  of new technologies  and the expansion  of 
universal  connectivity.  
  
4 Conclusion  
Continued  growth  and innovation  of the Internet,  and its corollary  technologies,  are 
vitally  important  to the sustainable  development  and public  welfare  contemplated  in the GDC  
initiative.   Achieving  these  public  interest  benefits  and the Sustainable  Development  Goals  
requires  an open,  free, global,  interoperable,  reliable,  and secure  Internet  – one that can deliver  
on the promise  of inclusive  connectivity  for all.  The GDC  should  advance  pro-investment  and 
pro-innovation  policies,  and the international  community  should  pursue  solutions  through  
transparent,  inclusive , and collaborative  processes.   The Coalition  looks  forward  to further  
engagement  on these  issues.  
/s/ David A. Gross  
Ambassador  David  A. Gross  
Chair,  Internet  Governance  Coalition  
dgross@wiley.law  
April  30, 2023  
 
i 
 ANNEX:  Partner2Connect  Examples  
Commitments  made  by members  of the Internet  Governance  Coalition  to the Partner2Connect  
Digital  Coalition  launched  by the International  Telecommunication  Union  include  the following:  
Amazon  
In December  2020,  Amaz on committed  to investing  hundreds  of millions  of dollars  to provide  
free cloud  computing  skills  training  to 29 million  people  by 2025 —reaching  people  from  all 
walks  of life and all levels  of knowledge,  in more  than 200 countries  and territories.   On this 
mission,  Amazon  has already  helped  over 6 million  people  gain cloud  skills,  and the latest  efforts  
build  on the existing  commitment  by putting  skills  training  into the hands  of millions  of people.   
We are providing  training  opportunities  through  existing  AWS-designed  programs  and launching  
new ways  to increase  access.   Programs  range  from  self-paced  online  courses —designed  to help 
individuals  update  their technical  skills —to intensive  reskilling  programs  that can lead to new 
jobs in the technology  industry.  
AT&T,  Inc. 
AT&T has made the following commitments to the Partner2Connect initiative: (1) AT&T 
pledges to equip  more than 3 million people  in 13 countries/jurisdictions  with digital skills 
training  by 2025; (2) AT&T pledges to provide  1 million people in need  with digital resources 
through AT&T Connected Learning ℠ by 2025; and (3) AT&T pledges to  support more than 
6,000 women entrepreneurs  in 5 countries  by 2025, through both financial support and relevant 
training.  
In addition to these three ple dges, AT&T and the United States Telecommunication Training 
Institute (USTTI) have made a joint pledge: AT&T and USTTI  commit to delivering a structured 
network disaster recovery training program  to 20 regulators and telecom industry representatives , 
with a focus on those from Least Developed Countries (LDCs), Landlocked Developing 
Countries (LLDCs), and Small Island Developing States (SIDS).  
Google  LLC  
Google  pledges  to up-skill the work  force  globally  thru “Grow  with Google”  Program : 
• UPSKILLING THE WORKF ORCE  
• Google has contributed to the world’s economic and digitization of opportunities.   
o One example is our commitment to provide over 500,000 scholarships for people 
around the world to access / qualify for Google Career Certificates.  These are 
training courses to help people earn job -ready skills in growing career fields.   
o We have committed to providing 150,000 scholarships for these Certificates in 
Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, with 50,000 of these are allocated to people 
from underserved communities through Google.org.   
o In the US, we are providing 130,000 scholarsh ips for the CareerCertificates.   
o In the Asia Pacific, we ’re providing over 250,000 scholarships to women, youth and 
mid-career professionals looking for new job opportunities or career switch.  This is 
part of our broader ‘Grow with Google ’ program, imple mented together with 
governmental, non -governmental, industry and community partners .   
 
ii 
 o Through this program, we have trained 94 million people around the world since 
2015 in the skills they need to build their career, launch or grow their business.   
o Of the 94 million people, it includes 20 million people in EMEA, 8 million in the US, 
9 million in LATAM and 58 million in Asia Pacific.  
Google  pledges  over $1 billion  to enhance  digital  transformations  globally : 
• ENHANCING DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION  
• Google believe s in helping the world grow through innovation and digital transformations.   
o In Southeast Asia, we will provide $75 million in funding and in -kind support 
through Google.org over the next 5 years to support nonprofits working to address 
societal challenge s through digital transformation.  This includes $25 million in 
funding and $50 million in in -kind product donations.   
o A major part of this will be to equip 200,000 medium and small enterprises with skills 
to grow their businesses, through a $4 million gr ant to The Asia Foundation ’s Go 
Digital ASEAN.  
o In Africa, we plan to invest $1 billion over the coming years in a range of initiatives, 
from improving connectivity, to investing in startups.  
Google  pledges  to enhance  device  affordability  globally :  
• DEVICE AFFORDABILITY  
• The Internet has done many things - including giving anyone with an Internet connection the 
same access to information as PhD students.  Tools like Google Search and YouTube play an 
important role in connecting people with relevant inf ormation.   
o In addition, we believe another form of accessibility is affordability and global 
accessibility of our products.  We strive to make our devices affordable in the markets 
where we sell devices.   
o We’ve introduced more affordable versions of our products, including for Pixel 
phones and the Pixel Buds, where we’ve streamlined flagship devices to deliver 
Google quality at competitive price points.  In 2011, we launched a new type of 
computer: cloud -based, fast, simple, and secure - the Chromebook.  Chromebooks run 
on open -source OS (ChromeOS), and any device manufacturer can develop 
chromebooks at any price points, including cheaper than traditional laptops.   
o Android is an open -source OS, meaning consumers have an option to purchase 
Android devices from over 1,000 companies around the world with 24K different 
device models to choose from, ranging from low cost devices to premier flagships 
like the Pixel 6 Pro.   
o And this goes beyond our traditional hardware and software.  Nest thermostats, our 
produc ts can make other costs like heating and cooling more affordable.  In fact, on 
average the Nest Learning Thermostat also saved 10% to 12% on heating and 15% on 
cooling in addition to allowing users to reduce their carbon emissions.  All of these, 
we believ e, have helped increase access to the Internet making it easier for consumers 
to access digital content.  
  
 
iii 
 Intelsat  
Intelsat  pledges  to utilize  its Wi-Fi Internet  access  solutions  to connect  100 schools  in rural  and 
remote  areas  in the context  of the GIGA  initiative  by 2025.   Connecting  schools  allows  children  
to develop  digital  skills  and access  online  learning  content.   Schools  can also become  anchor  
points  for surrounding  communities:  if you can connect  the school,  you can also connect  local  
businesses  and services.   This creates  opportunities  for service  providers  to generate  revenue  
from  paying  users,  making  connectivity  more  sustainable.  
Intelsat  pledges  to sign a MoU  with the ITU through  which  it makes  available  up to $500K  of 
airtime  as well as the necessary  equipment  to be utilized  in case of natural  or man-made  
disasters.   When  a disaster  strikes,  and all the terrestrial  infrastructure  has been  destroyed  or 
damaged,  satellite  becomes  the essential  tool for those  in affected  areas.  
Intelsat  pledges  to produce  several  white  papers  which  will showcase  case studies  and best 
practices  on the use of satellites  as a tool for digital  transformation,  connectivity  in hard-to-
connect  areas,  as well as on policies  and practices  to advance  space  sustaina bility.  
Microsoft  Corporation  
Microsoft  pledged  to train and certify  10 million  people  from  underserved  communities  with in-
demand  digital,  foundational  or technical  skills  by 2025.  Microsoft ’s Airband  Initiative  made  a 
number  of joint pledges  on connectivity,  including  to collaborate  with Liquid  Intelligent  
Technologies  to deliver  Internet  access  to 20 million  underserved  people  in Africa  by the end of 
2025.  
Verizon  Communications  
Verizon  is dedicated  to economic,  environmental,  and social  advancement,  and has established  
goals  to provide  10 million  youths  with digital  skills  training  by 2030,  1 million  small  businesses  
with resources  to help them  thrive  in the digital  economy  by 2030,  and to prepare  500,000  
individuals  for jobs of the future  by 2030.  
The Walt  Disney  Company  
The Walt  Disney  Company  will sustain  and expand  programmatic  investments  in children ’s 
digital  wellness,  skills,  and inclusion  around  the world.   We currently  have initiatives  operating  
in approximately  15 coun tries,  many  of which  serve  people  in multiple  countries.   More  
information  can be found  in our CSR  Report .   
 