 
1 
  
Contribution of the United States of America for the Global Digital 
Compact 
 
Introduction   
 
The United States welcomes the opportunity to provide a written input into 
the process to develop a Global Digital Compact ahead of the United Nations 
(UN) Summit of the Future.  The United States is committed to global action 
to realize the opportunities of the digital age for everyone.  Global digital 
cooperation is essential to help ensure that these technologies are a force 
for good around the world and that the benefits positively impact people’s 
lives and allows for the free exercise of their human rights.  
 
The United States supports an inclusive and transparent process under Our 
Common Agenda  to develop an appropriately scoped and rights-respecting 
Global Digital Compact that helps outline “shared principles for an open, 
free and secure digital future for all.”   
 
Process to Develop the Global Digital Compact  
 
To achieve a credible and lasting Global Digital Compact, the process and 
outcome should allow for the inputs and feedback from all stakeholders, 
including governments, civil society, the private sector, the technical 
community, and academia.  Any effort to develop shared principles must be 
exactly that: shared.  The  process must be transparent and expert-driven, 
build on the over two-decades of work by the global community, include the 
active and meaningful participation of all stakeholders, and remain rooted in 
the foundational principles of the UN.   
 
The United States applauds the co-facilitators for holding consultations with 
a wide range of stakeholders during the early stages of this process.  The 
United States welcomes the initiative of the UN Secretary-General's Envoy 
on Technology to solicit inputs from all stakeholders and ensure 
 
2 transparency and inclusivity in the UN’s work.  The United States is also 
pleased by the efforts of many stakeholders to organize their own 
consultations, and we encourage all interested parties to review those 
contributions.  The United States has begun engaging with U.S. stakeholders 
and international partners and is committed to further dialogue.      
 
Multistakeholder participation must continue throughout the Compact 
negotiating process.  The United States will continue to push for the active 
and meaningful participation of all stakeholders, representative of the global 
stakeholder community, even after the initial consultative stage.   
 
Scope of the Global Digital Compact  
  
The United States supports a Global Digital Compact that outlines shared 
principles to protect and promote human rights, bolster digital inclusion and 
digital skills, close digital divides, elevate a rights-based approach to digital 
development and transformation, strengthen global digital cooperation, 
realize the full potential of the digital economy, and support a future for the 
Internet that is open, free, global, interoperable, reliable, safe, and secure.   
 
While we understand a potential desire to address many or all digital 
technology issues through the Global Digital Compact, participants in the 
process should be practical about the scope and complexity of issues under 
consideration.  Some topics are better addressed through expert fora in 
other parts of the UN system, within multistakeholder processes, or at the 
regional, national, or local levels.  The Global Digital Compact needs to also 
take into account and be respectful of the mandates, core competencies, 
limited resources, and differing governing structures of other multilateral 
and multistakeholder entities that will, nevertheless, be essential to 
promoting and realizing the principles outlined in the Global Digital 
Compact.  
 
The United States welcomes that Our Common Agenda  recognizes the 
current value and future potential of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 
including as a platform to address existing and emerging challenges.  The 
 
3 United States strongly supports the IGF as the preeminent global body 
bringing together all stakeholders through a bottom-up process to discuss 
rights-respecting solutions to Internet public policy issues.  The Global 
Digital Compact can support the continued improvement of the IGF to 
further strengthen its impact as a global, multistakeholder platform.  At the 
same time, the United States emphasizes the importance of the IGF 
maintaining its existing bottom-up nature.   
 
The United States has also been a strong supporter of the World Summit on 
the Information Society (WSIS) process for the past two decades, including 
through the important work of UN specialized agencies like the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the UN Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO).  The Global Digital Compact could build on 
that work, including by furthering progress on the implementation of the 
WSIS Action Lines.  The Global Digital Compact should also ensure 
alignment, promote synergy, and avoid duplication with UNGA’s upcoming 
twenty-year review of WSIS in 2025 (WSIS+20).  
 
The United States believes the process to develop a Global Digital Compact 
should respect and avoid duplicating existing UN processes that are already 
working to address related digital policy issues.  For example, the UN Open-
ended Working Group on the international security dimensions of 
cyberspace and the UN Ad Hoc Committee developing a cybercrime treaty 
intend to culminate their work in parallel to the Global Digital Compact 
process.  We believe those and other issues will be better addressed 
through their established processes and, as such, are outside the scope of 
the Global Digital Compact process.     
 
Elements of the Global Digital Compact  
 
The United States recommends that the Global Digital Compact build on the 
work of the IGF in 2022.  The IGF adapted the proposals from Our Common 
Agenda to organize its work into the following sub-themes: (i) Connecting All 
People; (ii) Safeguarding Human Rights; (iii) Avoiding Internet 
Fragmentation; (iv) Governing Data and Protecting Privacy; (v) Enabling 
 
4 Safety, Security, and Accountability; and (vi) Addressing Advanced 
Technologies, including Artificial Intelligence.  We believe the Global Digital 
Compact would benefit from a section on “Accelerating Progress Towards 
the Sustainable Development Goals” that focuses on digital inclusion, digital 
transformation, and ensuring that no one is left behind.  The Global Digital 
Compact would also benefit from a preamble and implementation section.   
 
The United States believes that all elements of the Global Digital Compact 
need to pay particular attention to the rights and needs of, as well as the 
challenges faced by, individuals from vulnerable groups or populations.  
These groups include those that may be at heightened risk of becoming or 
are already marginalized, both online and offline, as well as demographics 
that face varying risks, such as women and girls, gender non-conforming 
individuals, and men and boys. This includes paying attention to the ways in 
which digital technologies accelerate, not just reflect, existing inequalities.   
 
The United States notes that while some of the  Our Common Agenda’s  
recommendations on digital technology have merit, they often represent 
specific solutions and not a broader framework.  In some cases, the 
recommendation is problematic itself or not appropriate for this forum and 
unlikely to lead to an outcome that can be agreed upon by all UN Member 
States.    
 
The United States proposes considering the following under each priority 
theme:    
 
I. Preamble:  This section should identify cross-cutting principles that apply 
to all elements of the Global Digital Compact and reaffirm foundational 
principles, including those in the UN Charter and the Universal 
Declaration for Human Rights.  These principles include recognition of 
the benefits and risks of digital technologies and reaffirmation that 
existing international law is applicable offline and online.  This section 
could affirm the following priorities for global digital cooperation: make 
progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); help 
maintain international peace and security; close digital divides; protect 
 
5 and strengthen respect for human rights; mitigate bias and inequity; and 
help ensure that all people can enjoy the benefits of meaningful access 
to digital technologies, while mitigating the risks.  This section also 
needs to clearly recognize the roles that all stakeholders play in 
advancing global digital cooperation.  It should recognize the 
importance of appropriate accountability and transparency measures 
across sectors.  It could also recognize the existing good work to 
advance global digital cooperation and be clear that the goal of the 
Global Digital Compact is to support, but not duplicate, those existing 
activities.   
 
II. Connecting All People: Connectivity is a critical enabler for global digital 
cooperation.  This section should prioritize and elevate efforts to 
connect the unconnected and expand affordable, inclusive, safe, secure, 
multilingual, and reliable Internet access for all individuals, schools, 
organizations, and businesses.  It is important that the Global Digital 
Compact support efforts to close digital divides around the world, 
including the gender digital divide, and ensure that no one is left behind, 
including persons with disabilities and other diverse and intersecting 
identities.  The Compact should support the safe and equitable use of 
the Internet for everyone, without discrimination based on sex, race, 
color, ethnic, nationality or citizenship, national or social origin, location, 
genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other 
opinion, membership of an indigenous population, property, birth, 
disability, age, gender identity, or sexual orientation.  This section needs 
to reinforce principles around promoting investment in inclusive and 
secure infrastructure deployment, incentivizing public-private 
partnerships, reducing barriers to innovation in technology and policy 
approaches, and reinvigorating global commitments to ensure that the 
2.7 billion unconnected people around the world can access the 
Internet.  This section should prioritize development and investment in 
infrastructure that supports access to digital technologies, such as, but 
not limited to education, science and research, transportation, and 
electricity.  At the same time, it is important that efforts to connect all 
people consider the other dimensions of connectivity and access, 
 
6 including issues of human rights, digital inclusion, safety, and security 
discussed below.  The Global Digital Compact could reflect and support 
the work of organizations such as the ITU towards achieving universal 
connectivity by 2030.   
 
III. Safeguarding Human Rights:  This section must clearly outline the 
principles and safeguards that help ensure digital technologies are 
resources for the free exercise of human rights and are not tools for 
repression.  This includes reaffirming that the same rights protected 
offline must also be protected online.  The Compact should affirm that 
the ways in which technologies are designed, developed, maintained, 
governed, acquired, funded, deployed, and used should be shaped by a 
commitment to human rights and the principles of equality, inclusivity, 
sustainability, transparency, accountability, diversity, and respect for 
privacy.  It needs to reaffirm principles of the rule of law, appropriate 
legal protections, legitimate purpose, non-arbitrariness, and effective 
oversight.  This includes providing access to meaningful remedies for 
human rights violations and abuses.  This section should also reflect a 
commitment from all member states to refrain from misusing or abusing 
the Internet, data, or algorithmic tools or techniques for arbitrary and 
unlawful surveillance, oppression, and repression.  Additionally, it could 
reinforce the need to ensure that biometric tools should be used only 
when lawful and appropriate.  It needs to reinforce the principles 
embedded in the UN Guiding Principles for Business and Human Rights, 
including those concerning actions that should be taken by businesses 
enterprises, including technology platforms, to respect and promote 
human rights in their operations.  Finally, this section could strengthen 
the commitment in the UN Secretary-General’s Roadmap on Digital 
Cooperation  that the UN will consider human rights implications in its 
own adoption and use of digital and emerging technologies, including 
the use of such technologies to improve the security and effectiveness 
of UN peacekeeping missions.   
 
IV. Accelerating Progress Towards the SDGs: This section can help ensure 
that connectivity and digital technologies are improving quality of life 
 
7 for all people, increasing economic prosperity, and helping to make 
progress towards the SDGs.  It is important that the global community 
furthers the goal of digital inclusion by focusing on issues like improving 
digital literacy, skills acquisition, and digital transformation to close 
digital divides and strengthening capacities to ensure individuals can use 
the Internet safely and in their own language and realize the economic 
and social potential of the digital economy, particularly for those in 
underserved communities.  This section should also focus of the 
transformative power of open digital markets, promote the principle of 
Net Neutrality, and strengthen entrepreneurship and innovation to 
stimulate development and use of digital tools, including by small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SME), towards achieving and surpassing the 
SDGs.  It should promote the essential roles of the private sector and a 
positive enabling and regulatory environment in increasing access to the 
digital economy for the underserved and promote the protection of 
consumers, particularly vulnerable consumers, from unfair practices 
online.  It could also underscore the critical importance of creating and 
supporting an enabling environment for the development and 
amplification of online content that is relevant and meaningful for 
people in their own communities, including diverse cultural content, 
information, and news.  This section should encourage digital 
development and transformation that is sustainable, reduces the 
environmental footprint of the Internet and digital technologies, and is a 
tool to combat and mitigate the impacts of climate change. 
 
V. Avoiding Internet Fragmentation: The global Internet, facilitated by the 
free flow of information, continues to be a powerful catalyst for 
sustainable development, a tool for people to improve their quality of 
life, including through access to education, health resources, and 
economic opportunity, and a platform where people can freely exercise 
their human rights.   This section should promote a future for the 
Internet that is an open, global, interoperable, reliable, and secure and 
that continues to be governed by the multistakeholder model.   This 
section needs to help ensure that the Internet continues to evolve as an 
open and decentralized network of networks.  This section needs to 
 
8 promote the importance of trustworthy network infrastructure and 
service suppliers.  This section should also consider ways to mitigate the 
risks and harms when actors misuse the Internet or inappropriately 
restrict access and content, and it should highlight the dangers on the 
integrity of global connectivity from government-imposed Internet 
shutdowns and degrading domestic Internet access.    
 
VI. Governing Data and Protecting Privacy: This section needs to highlight 
principles that strengthen human rights-respecting data governance, 
including data privacy and transparency, and help ensure that 
expectations are set for how sensitive (including personal) data is 
collected, used, stored, accessed, aggregated, transferred, protected, 
and maintained.   This effort includes transparency about algorithms that 
use the data, to the extent feasible.  This section needs to recognize that 
data governance capacity within governments is essential but 
insufficient on its own, and these protections need to be built into data 
governance systems.  It is important that this section emphasize that 
government access to sensitive (including personal) data should be 
based on the rule of law and conducted in accordance with applicable 
international human rights law, reinforcing principles that promote trust 
in cross-border data flows.  This section could also advance best 
practices and highlight the commitment of all member states to protect 
individuals’ privacy, sensitive (including personal) data, and the 
confidentiality of electronic communications and information on end-
users’ electronic devices, consistent with the protection of public safety 
and applicable domestic and international law.  This section should 
include the principle of data minimization with limitations on the use, 
processing, retention, aggregation, and dissemination of data consistent 
with the purpose for which it was acquired.   
 
VII. Enabling Safety, Security, and Accountability: As highlighted in the 
Roadmap on Digital Cooperation , there is a strong linkage between 
principles of digital trust and security and efforts to realize the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and digital technologies must be 
deployed and used in a safe and trustworthy manner .  This section 
 
9 needs to address the importance of information integrity and resilience 
as a means through which the misuse of online platforms for digital 
repression (including censorship and harassment) can be prevented.  
This section should promote online safety and help ensure that 
stakeholders are working together to mitigate harms and address 
accountability for online platforms, products, and services, including 
through principles for appropriate regulatory frameworks for 
governments to advance accountability and transparency for technology 
platforms.  This includes strengthening efforts to protect children 
through stronger privacy and online protections.  It also includes 
strengthening efforts to prevent and respond to technology-facilitated 
gender-based violence (TFGBV) that threatens the safety and rights of 
women and girls; combatting child sexual exploitation; and protecting 
LGBTQI+ persons, members of ethnic minorities and other marginalized 
and vulnerable groups, human rights defenders, political activists, 
journalists, civil society, and others in public life, such as women 
politicians.  This also means strengthening efforts to avoid 
discrimination in algorithmic decision-making and promoting 
transparency about algorithms and content moderation decisions.  It 
should encourage countries to build national capacity for domestic 
cyber resilience, particularly to protect critical infrastructure, and 
encourage global action to strengthen cybersecurity capacity and 
expertise worldwide.  This section could also recognize existing work 
already underway in the UN system on these issues, including the work 
in the Open-ended Working Group on international security in 
cyberspace, the Ad Hoc Committee developing a UN cybercrime treaty, 
the 67th Session of the Commission on the Status of Women and the 
implementation of its agreed conclusions, the ITU’s cybersecurity 
development efforts, and the IGF’s thematic work and global dialogue 
on cybersecurity policy issues, among others.   
 
VIII. Addressing Advanced Technologies, including AI: New and emerging 
digital technologies, including artificial intelligence (AI), are already 
rapidly changing lives and businesses around the world and have 
pervasive and far-reaching global implications.  These technologies have 
 
10 demonstrated significant benefits and will continue to yield new 
advances in industry, education, science, and more.  Yet these 
technologies also have potential risks, and their ultimate impact remains 
uncertain.  As such, a global, multistakeholder, and multi-sectoral 
approach towards addressing advanced technologies is essential to 
ensure they are a force for good and that associated risks are mitigated, 
including in the development and design of such technologies.  This 
section needs to recognize the potential benefits of these technologies, 
including to economic growth and improved health outcomes.  At the 
same time, this section should be clear-eyed about the risks of some 
technologies, including risks to economies, labor, human rights, safety, 
privacy and data protection, national security, and digital security.  This 
section should recognize that these technologies can reinforce and 
exacerbate existing biases and societal inequalities and increase 
misinformation, disinformation, and mal-information.  This section 
should also support a risk-based approach to the governance of AI 
technologies as embodied in the U.S. National Institute of Standards and 
Technology’s (NIST) AI Risk Management Framework (RMF), which 
recognizes that the risks of AI technologies depend on the context of 
their design, development, deployment, and use.  This section, 
therefore, needs to reflect a policy environment that promotes a human 
rights and safety-based, secure, human-centric approach to trustworthy 
AI that fosters responsible research and development and that 
preserves economic incentives to innovate, while respecting a range of 
national and international approaches to governance. 
 
IX. Follow-up and Implementation: This section needs to ensure that 
member states and other stakeholders work together to promote the 
Global Digital Compact principles, both inside and outside the UN 
system.  It should encourage cooperation and collaboration among 
stakeholders from around the world and avoid duplication of effort.  A 
key forum to continue the dialogue on the Global Digital Compact will 
be the IGF, which should continue to serve as a bottom-up, 
multistakeholder platform within the UN system to discuss these and 
related issues.  This section should also recognize the important, two-
 
11 decades of work related to implementation of the WSIS and ensure the 
Global Digital Compact aligns with the existing follow-up and review 
mechanisms and WSIS+20.  Finally, this section should encourage all UN 
entities to adopt new digital tools to improve the work of the UN 
system, based on the principles of the Global Digital Compact. 