 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 1 GNI Submission  to the Global Digital Compact Consultation  
  
The Global Network Initiative  (GNI)  welcomes the opportunity to submit input to  the 
intergovernmental process on the Global  Digital  Compact. GNI has held multiple discussions 
with our full membership to inform the development of this submission, and we are pleased to 
be able to share core principles and commitments  we hope to see reflected in  the Global Digital 
Compact.  
 
GNI’s perspective is i nformed by over a decade and a half of experience undertaking 
multistakeholder collaboration to advance the  GNI Principles on Freedom of Expression and 
Privacy  and corresponding Implementation Guidelines  (together, the GNI framework) . The 
framework provides guidance on how information and communication technology (ICT) 
companies can build appropriate policies, systems, and capacity to advance responsible 
decision -making in response to  government pressures, restrictions, or demands . GNI’s expert 
members work together  to uphold and promote this framework around the world, assess 
implementation of the framework  by companies through our unique assessment process , 
participate in  shared learning on related issues, challenges, and opportunities , and  engage in  
policy advocacy in support of  rights -respecting  laws and policies .  
 
GNI members include 90 leading digital rights and press freedom groups, information and 
communications and technology companies, investors , and academics.  This experience guiding 
company action, undertakin g shared learning, and engaging on laws and regulations across four 
policy areas — network disruptions, privacy and surveillance, jurisdictional assertions and limits, 
and content regulation — has offered valuable insights that can help guide all stakehold ers in 
developing shared frameworks to help preserve a free, open, and secure Internet.  
 
The GNI framework is centered on the rights to freedom of expression and privacy, and is 
consistent with  the foundations of the broader UN  Guiding Principle s on Busin ess and Human 
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 2 Rights  (UNGPs)  and international human rights law. Our submission focuses on GNI’s core 
commitments to  freedom of expression and privacy , while emphasizing areas where the 
framework  can provide guidance on policies and practices for addressin g the full range of 
human rights, as well as issues where our policy and learning experiences offer insights for 
broader digital governance and policymaking with a human rights lens.  Accordingly, we have 
organized the submission around core principles to p reserve digital rights, and then spelled out 
specific commitments for companies, governments, and all stakeholders.  
 
At the core of GNI’s mission, governance, and work is a commitment to  the inclusion of a broad 
diversity of voices and views  and a shared belief in the values and principles established in 
international human rights law. We strongly encourage the  co-chairs of the intergovernmental 
process, Member States, and all actors cont ributing to the multistakeholder technology track to 
ensure that the process and substance of developing the Global Digital Compact  reflects this 
approach.  
 
1) Focus Area : Applying Human Rights Online  
 
Principles  
• The GNI Principles on Freedom of Expression and Privacy  and corresponding 
Implementation Guidelines  provide a framework for responsible company  decision 
making  and multistakeholder engagement to advance  freedom of expression and privacy 
in the ICT sector. This framework  covers : 
o governance and oversight  of freedom of ex pression and privacy risks and 
opportunities , i.e. , “integrating the Principles into company DNA ”;  
o ongoing human rights due diligence  (HRDD)  and risk management, in line with 
guidance detailed in the UNGPs ; 
o policies and practices to assess and respond to government restrictions, 
demands, and requirements that impact freedom of expression and privacy ;  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 3 o transparency and engagement to inform stakeholders about companies’ policies 
and practices and promote the framework  
• The GNI Principles are rooted in the United Nation Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights  (UNGPs) and International Human Rights Law , whic h should remain core 
to any new principles and frameworks developed for an open, free, and secure digital 
future for all.  
• The right s to freedom of expression  and privacy  should not be restricted by 
governments, except in narrowly defined circumstances based on internationally 
recognized laws or standards.  
o Where governments seek to implement laws and regulations that might 
contribute to such restrictions, human rights prin ciples can help them find 
creative and appropriate ways to engage stakeholders, design fit -for-purpose 
regulations, and mitigate unintended consequences .  
• The state duty to protect human rights under the UNGPs  builds on the obligation not to 
infringe upon human rights directly and  includes both a duty to protect against human 
rights abuses by third parties, and  a duty  to ensure legal frameworks do not constrain 
but enable business respect for human rights.  
• The principle of non -discrimination should be refl ected in any content governance or 
regulation efforts.  
• Multistakeholder engagement is a foundational principle in  the history of  global Internet 
governance  that should be at the core of any additional efforts to set international 
norms and standards .  
• There is a need for improved, meaningful digital transparency from digital 
communications companies as well as from governments and regulators in this space.   
 
Commitments  
For Companies  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 4 • Companies should commit to  upholding human rights, including by implemen ting the 
UNGPs and the GNI Principles . GNI member companies commit to periodic  independent 
assessment of their efforts to implement these principles with improvement over time  
via GNI’s unique accountability mechanism.    
• The G NI framework is focused on freedom of expression and privacy, but provides 
relevant guidance for addressing the full range of human rights risks  and opportunities , 
including through the establishment of corporate commitments to human rights, 
developing com prehensive HRDD processes, engaging relevant stakeholders, practicing 
meaningful transparency, and providing appropriate senior/board -level oversight of 
these commitments and activities .  
For Governments :  
• Governments considering proposals to address conce rns about digital content and 
conduct should incorporate the guidance detailed in the GNI Content Regulation & 
Human Right s Policy Brief  (CRPB ). Governments should  conduct careful, public, and 
participatory deliberation  on such proposals , and  include strong transparency  and 
accountability measures for relevant oversight or enforcement bodies .  
• The CRPB details steps governments can take to uphold the human rights principles of 
legality, legitimacy, and necessity and proportionality , including :  
o Legality  – States should refrain from : using vague and reductive definitions that 
would incentivize  over -removal ; prohibiting categories of expressive conduct or 
content  without engaging in a transparent and participatory process of debate ; 
outsourc ing adjudication  of expression  to privat e companies without providing 
appropriate clarity on interpretation and application of the law ; or shift ing legal 
liability from authors to intermediaries for illegal content generated by users.  
o Legitimacy  – States should refrain from  allow ing laws  and/or regulation  to result 
in discriminate against content based on medium.  
o Necessity  – States should refrain from : apply ing legal requirements on platforms 
without considering their  relative size, capabilities, and business models;  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 5 impos ing strict timelines for removal of content  without regard to context, 
potential unintended consequence s, and the value of prioritization;  imposing 
preemptive filtering  or general monitoring  requirements ; or mak ing 
intermediaries liable for specific content moderation decisions.  
For All Stakeholders  
• Where the Global Digital Compact may speak to potential re gulatory approaches, we 
encourage the promotion of first principles,  key safeguards, and flexible guidance,  as 
opposed to more rigid regulatory frameworks  that can be misconstrued to justify  undue  
restrictions  and will have different implications and impacts in distinct jurisdictions 
depending on context, including resourcing and rule -of-law adherence .  
• The G lobal Digital Compact consultations and ultimate output  should explore avenues to 
reinforce and build up on existing efforts to empower multistakeholder processes and 
support work toward a free , open , interoperable,  and secure Internet, such efforts being 
undertak en through  the I nternet Governance Forum (IGF) , the Christchurch Call , the 
Freedom Online Coalition , and the Action Coalition on Meaningful Transparency .   
• Continue to build on efforts to identify good practices for meaningful and inclusive 
stakeholder engagement on digital rights issues .   
 
2) Focus Area: Avoiding Internet Fragmentation  
 
Principles  
• With increasing regulatory scrutiny of ICTs around the world , international human rights 
law offers time -tested guidance that can help align these efforts and provide clarity and 
predictability for governments,  companies , and individuals around the world .  
• The GNI Principles and Implementation Guidelines make clear that  ICT companies 
should comply with all applicable laws and respect internationally recognized human 
rights, wherever they operate.   
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 6 • If national laws, regulations , and policies do n ot conform to international standards, the 
GNI framework details steps to avoid, minimize, or otherwise address the adverse 
impact of government demands, laws, or regulations , including:  
o Requiring governments to follow established domestic laws and legal processes ;  
o Interpreting government requests narrowly, including regarding the requesting 
government’s jurisdiction ; 
o Proactively engaging with governments to encourage laws, regulations, 
requirements, restrictions, and demands that are consistent with inte rnational laws 
and standards ; 
o Seek ing the assistance, as needed, of relevant government authorities, international 
human rights bodies , or non -governmental organizations . 
• Government -ordered network disruptions are drastic measures that almost always 
violat e the principles of necessity and proportionality, often occurring during moments 
of political sensitivity or importance. Disruptions pose significant risks for human rights , 
as well as  economic and social wellbeing .  
• A small but growing number of governments also seek to implement  measures  
centralizing state control over internet infrastructure, an approach that warrants 
opprobrium .  
• Companies that hold user dat a can and should play an important role in scrutinizing and 
resisting improper, unnecessary, or disproportionate government demands. GNI 
recognizes that clear, rights -respecting, and efficient mechanisms for cross -border data  
sharing for the purposes of criminal investigations can help mitigate the risk of  more  
restrictive alternatives, such as circumventing  normal legal process  to access user data  
or compelling data localization .  
o GNI encourages bilateral, multilateral, and m ultistakeholder approaches that 
facilitate responses by companies who hold data abroad, where appropriate , to 
governments whose laws and procedures meet relevant international human rights 
standards.  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 7 • Data localization measures can pose privacy risks  when p aired with disproportionate 
authorities  for governments  to access user data stored in a country . By creating single 
points of failure and targets for attacks, they can also increase cybersecurity risks.  
• Opaque, arbitrary government surveillance practices c an contribute further to Internet 
fragmentation , creating  mistrust and limiting access to cross -border mechanisms.  
 
Commitments  
For Companies  
• In line with the guidance from the GNI framework , companies should continue to take 
steps to avoid, mitigate, or otherwise address potential adverse  human rights  impacts 
from  laws , policies , and government demands  that are likely to reinforce Internet 
fragmentation .  
• This includes multistakeholder advocacy to encourage governments and international 
institutions to adopt policies and practices that are consistent with and advance the GNI 
Principles.  
For Governments  
• Governments must refrain from the use of state -sponsored internet shutdowns and 
disruptions , and support multilateral engagement, including vi a the Freedom Online  
Coalition, to curb their use  and mitigate their impacts .  
• Governments should c ommit to preserving  the free flow of data across borders  where 
appropriate safeguards exist  to address potential cybersecurity or human rights risks .   
• Whe n seeking to address concerns about digital content and conduct, in line with the 
guidance in the CRPB , governments should target interventions to services and 
situations that generate signifi cant risk of harm . This means c arefully consider ing the 
types of services, at which layers in the ecosystem, that are appropriately positioned to 
address the specific concerns at issue, recognizing the consequences of such 
interventions may differ signific antly from one type of service to another.  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 8 • In looking to establish new mechanisms or update existing mechanisms for sharing 
digital evidence across borders for criminal investigations , governments should ensure 
the following  principles are included  to protect human rights : prior authorization of 
requests; focus on serious crimes; availability of meaningful redress; transparency 
regarding the number, type, and scope of the requests; and oversight and accountability . 
• GNI recently expressed  concern s about efforts from governments to ban or otherwise 
eliminate access to specific digital communications platforms.  While governments may 
have legitim ate concerns about the impact of digital content and conduct on specific 
platforms, completely blocking entire platforms, services, or mediums is almost never a 
necessary or proportionate response to such concerns .  
• Regulators should continue to identify spaces to  strengthen shared values and alignment  
on rights -respecting regulations.  
For All Stakeholders  
● Build capacity for and increas ed engagement with digital rights experts  in global Internet 
governance conversations, in cluding in standards bodies.  
 
3) Focus Area: Promoting Artificial Intelligence  
 
Principles  
● As detailed in the GNI framework, consistent with the UNGPs, and considering 
international human rights standards, parti cipating companies will carry out HRDD to 
identify, prevent, evaluate, mitigate and account for risks to the freedom of expression 
and privacy rights that are implicated by the company’s products, services, activities and 
operations.  
○ Where HRDD identifies  circumstances where freedom of expression and privacy 
may be jeopardized  or advance d, GNI companies commit to employ human 
rights impact assessments (HRIAs) and develop effective risk mitigation strategies 
as appropriate .  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
 9 ○ Designing and introducing new technologies, products , and services , and their 
use, is one area where HRDD has previously revealed the need for HRIAs .  
● Among other good practices, HRIAs should be prioritized where risks of adverse impacts 
are most salient, should be upda ted over time, and should draw upon insights from a 
variety of sources .  
● GNI companies also commit to use best efforts ensure that business partners, 
investments, suppliers, distributors, and other relevant related parties follow these 
Principles .  
● Recogni zing the constant change in the ICT sector, GNI’s multistakeholder membership 
commit to undertaking shared learning on contemporary freedom of expression and 
privacy challenges, including  considerations around  new and emerging technologies  and 
the GNI fram ework .  
● All stakeholders should give particular care to the potential freedom of expression risks 
associated with automated tools for content moderation;  
○ Requirements for companies to proactively filter types of harmful content 
require significant human r ights  scrutiny .  
● We support the risk -based approach taken by various national and multilateral initiatives 
considering legal frameworks for AI, which target the uses of artificial intelligence that 
offer the most salient risks and tailor requirements for identifying, preventing, and 
mitigating risks accordingly .  
● The application of artificial intelligence by public actors, including law enforcement, 
deserves at least as much, if not more, scrutiny as commercial applications  in any 
regulatory framework. Requirements for privacy risk assessments or HRDD or HRIA 
should apply equally to commercial and public uses.  
 
Commitments  
For Governments  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
10 ● Whether governments are deploying AI -enabled technology directly, or requiring or 
incen tivizing its use by other actors, it is critical that they continue to ensure that the 
development, design, and deployment of such technology is conducted transparency, 
informed by stakeholder input, and governed by adequate transparency and 
accountability . Without sufficient and appropriate governance frameworks that allow for 
independent scrutiny, risk identification and mitigation, public awareness and education, 
individual choice/ability to opt -out, and appropriate remedy, public trust will be 
undermine d and the potential benefits of AI -enabled technologies will be jeopardized.  
● Governments must take a more active role in developing safeguards, such as robust 
transparency, accountability, and oversight mechanisms, regarding  the use of AI-enabled 
technolog ies for law enforcement and surveillance purposes. This includes particular 
attention to the privacy and data protection risks associated  with the collection of 
biometric data.  
● Governments seeking to regulate AI should ground such efforts in international  human 
rights law, which provid e an important baseline from which to analyze risks and 
opportunities effectively, to define key safeguards and proportionate approaches, and to 
help ensure that myriad efforts at national, regional, and international levels to regulate 
AI are in sync.  
For Companies  
● Companies must ensure that their development and use of AI -enabled technology, 
including the sale of such technologies, is consistent with their responsibility to respect 
human rights, including the right to priva cy. GNI’s multistakeholder framework offers a 
model for the ICT sector to ensure respect for privacy and freedom of expression in their 
products, services, and operations, including those utilizing AI.   
● As detailed in the data protection section below, com panies must employ protections 
with respect to personal information in all countries where they operate.  
For All stakeholders  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
11 ● Inclusive and diverse multistakeholder engagement should be core to any normative 
efforts and their promotion . All stakeholders must pay particular attention to the 
impacts on marginalized groups when considering regulating or implementing AI 
technologies.  
● GNI strives to continue fostering shared learning and expert engagement on AI issues, 
including potential dis cussions on generative AI.   
 
4) Focus Area: Protect Data 
 
Principles  
● The GNI Principles on Freedom of Expression and Privacy and corresponding 
Implementation Guidelines call on companies to employ protections with respect to 
personal information in all countries where they operate in order to protect the privacy 
rights of u sers in the face of government demands and restrictions.  
● The GNI framework encourage s participating companies to disclose, to the extent 
allowed under the law, what laws and policies compel them to provide personal 
information to government authorities, what personal information the participating 
companies collect, and the company’s polici es and procedures for responding to 
government demands  (see more about the se policies and practices in the “Internet 
Fragmentation” section) . 
○ The framework also details that participating companies will assess the human 
rights risks associated with the col lection, storage, and retention of personal 
information in the jurisdictions where they operate and develop appropriate 
mitigation strategies to address these risks.  
● GNI encourages companies to adopt policies and procedures that address situations 
where go vernments may make demands through proxies and other third parties to 
evade domestic legal procedures.  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
12 ● Government surveillance activities must comply with principles of rule of law and 
democratic governance, as well as human rights principles such as lega lity, necessity, and 
proportionality.  
○ GNI has documented concerns  about legal and technical arrangements that allow 
government authorities to ac cess data streams directly – that is, without having 
to request access from, or even notify, the service providers that collect and/or 
transmit the data as part of their services. By taking operators “out of the loop,” 
these “direct access” arrangements re move a critical potential safeguard for user 
privacy.  
● Governments and regulators considering new or updated data protection laws must also 
center human rights in their design . This includes not only ensuring strong foundations 
for privacy and data protecti on, but avoiding some of the risks and pitfalls GNI has seen 
in recent approaches , which include:  overly broad exceptions for public actors and/ or 
national security purposes ; using data protection to expand surveillance authorities ; 
insufficient independe nce and oversight of new regulator y bodies ; or unnecessary limits 
on cross -border data flows (see “Internet Fragmentation” section above ). 
 
Commitments  
For Companies:  
● Companies should assess the human rights risks of data collection  and storage practices 
in jurisdictions on an ongoing basis and develop mitigation strateg ies, as described in the 
GNI framework.  
● Companies should seek to be transparent about the laws and regulations that may 
authorize access to user data, including via reso urces like the GNI Country Legal 
Frameworks Resource , and to share statistics about the demands they face to the extent 
the law allows.  
For Governments  
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
13 ● Lead by exam ple by c ommitti ng to data protection approaches that consider 
responsibility for public actors and/or avoid broad exemptions for those actors .  
● Collection and processing of data by governments should be subject to clear and 
meaningful safeguards :  
○ Any exem ptions must be narrowly defined, subject to the principles of necessity, 
proportionality, and legality consistent with international human rights 
standards.  
○ Governments should commit to strict standards for access to user data ,  such as 
independent judicia l authorization, avenues for oversight and transparency,  and 
remedial measures .  
○ Governments should provide notice  to surveillance target s when notification 
won’t unduly impact investigation s, and  avoid undue restrictions on companies 
providing notice.  
○ Governments should not only enable company transparency around government 
demands, but law enforcement and executive bodies should also model 
transparency measures to complement these company effort s.  
● Governments should address potential legal loopholes that can enable  government 
procurement of user data via third parties .  
● Governments should avoid introducing legal frameworks enabling direct access. Where 
these authorities exist already,  they shoul d at minimum : (i) provide sufficient 
authorization procedures, supervision, and remedy so as to ensure that surveillance 
conducted is proportional to the purpose for which it is authorized and provide effective 
guarantees against abuse; (ii) allow companie s to disclose information about 
interception and access to data on their networks ; and (iii) ensure that such access is 
disclosed to the subject in a timely manner if that data is used in any civil, 
administrative, or criminal proceeding.   
 
 
1325 G St. NW, Suite 500 , Washington, DC 20005 • GlobalNetworkInitiative.org • info@GlobalNetworkInitiative.org        
14 ○ Governments shou ld also s trengthen export controls for technologies that are 
intended for use in direct access in countries with repressive track records, in line 
with UNGPs.  
For All Stakeholders  
● As laws and regulations envision new mechanisms for data access for research ers, an 
admirable transparency aim, there is an important responsibility to put forth good 
guidance on related data protection measures as well.   
● All stakeholders should a dvocate for expanded transparency, oversight, and 
accountability of laws, regulation s, and actions related to communications surveillance.  
 
 