1 
United Nations Development Programme  Submission to the Global Digital Compact  
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  
 
Rapid digital transformation is changing the context of development, representing an opportunity to 
accelerate progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. 
UNDP’s Digital Strategy 2022 -2025 has focused on effectivel y harnessing the power of digital 
technologies to support UNDP’s broader programmatic goals of helping 100 million people escape 
multidimensional poverty, supporting 500 million to gain access to clean energy and 800 million to 
participate in elections, wh ile promoting over $1 trillion of public and private investments in the SDGs. 
We do this through our program mes to partner with countries in creating thriving and well -governed 
digital and data economies , supporting  inclusive digital societies focused on wid espread adoption of 
responsible technology practices and standards: inclusion, privacy, security, transparency, and good 
governance.  Our inclusive approach is guided by our commitment to leave no one behind, and  to 
promote  gender equality.   Demand for UNDP ’s support on digital continues to surge, and in the last 
three years, UNDP has supported more than 250 digital solutions and platforms across 100 
countries.    
The Global Digital Compact is an opportunity to put forward a series of underlying, high -level 
principles that should guide everyone – member states, the UN system, tech companies, civil society 
and stakeholders, about the future direction of digital techn ology in relation to people and planet . 
Drawing on our local presence in over 170 countries, including in crisis and fragile settings, and in the 
least connected parts of the world; our deep relationships with local digital ecosystems; and our 
built -up glo bal and local capacity for digital transformation, including through our Digital Advocates 
Network across all programming countries and Accelerator Labs in 91 locations supporting 115 
countries; UNDP has the honour to propose  the following elements for inc lusion in  the Global Digital 
Compact.  
 
• This is a moment of global infle ction . Although countries around the world urgently want to  
transform digitally, governments often lack the knowledge, capacity, and investment needed 
to close the digital divide, particularly in an inclusive mann er. 
 
• Digitalization and new technologies can be a double -edged sword, fueling sustainable 
development  while simultaneously threatening  to further widen the digital divide by 
exacerbating inequalities and reversing gains. Digitalization efforts therefore are not always 
sustainable, equitable or rights -based. Inequalities are being exacerbated, with billions of 
people remaining offline or poorly connected , particularly women and other marginalized 
populations . Other intersecting inequalities are keeping people in rural areas, marginalized 
groups, refugees,  and oth er vulnerable populations unconnected.  
 
• More problems and unintended consequences are arising with the development and 
deployment of technology, such as information pollution, data breach, and increased 
environmental impact (GHG emission, e -waste, extraction). Digitalization also  enables harms  
related to surveillance, exploitation,  and exclusion.  
 
• Appropriate and robust policies and regulations are often not in place. Countries may lack 
the capacity to develop and assert their own regulatory and policy frameworks. In particular, 
2 
United Nations Development Programme  countries in the Global South lack the channels and capabilities to mai ntain sovereignty over 
digitalization within their borders, much less influence global governance frameworks.  
 
• Digital technologies and platforms are boosting the risk of gender -based violence and 
cybersecurity concerns, threating women’s safety and data privacy – particularly of women 
politicians, women ’s rights and environmental defenders and women journalists . Efforts to 
eradicate digital and technology -facilitated gender -based violence (GBV) require multi -
dimensional responses that integrat e enhanced leg islation, policy frameworks and 
regulations that hold tech firms accountable.   
 
• Since  countries are  making fundamental investments and decisions  in digital  infrastructure 
right now , it is imperative that the international system, in particular the United Nations, 
make s support available . 
 
• The challenge is how countries can transform digitally at scale, with rights , inclusion  and 
equality  embedded in intention and implementation, and build  a future -proof pol icy 
environment with governance frameworks in place to react to the rapid development of 
new technologies.  
 
• Countries around the world face common challenges in struggling to apply digital 
technologies to address  national priorities (e.g. developing Carbon Trading Systems, Social 
Protection Systems, AI for Local Languages, Identity Systems etc.).  If countries s tart to 
“reinvent the wheel” individually each time, they suffer from high costs, duplicative efforts,  
and risk vulnerability to vendor lock -in, etc.  
 
• The United Nations can help steward a “Global Digital Commons” approach that looks at 
common or reusable technologies such as Digital Public Goods  (DPGs) , as well as Digital 
Public Infrastructure, t o shorten the adoption curve and make digital technologies more 
accessible and equitable to all.  This approach can also  facilitate South -South knowledge -
exchange a nd cooperation , which can enable countries with limited resources and capacities 
to speed up digital transformation .  
 
• We should  build  safe and responsible Global Digital Commons, affirming the value of Digital 
Public Goods and the importance of inclusive and rights -based Digital Public Infrastructure . 
 
UNDP is already working closely with many partners, including the G20 , to highlight the role that 
Digital Public Infrastructure can play. UNDP is also a member of the Digital Public Goods Alliance, 
and supporting countries in deploying DPGs across sectors such as health, environment, 
misinformation, etc ., as well as creating an online catalogue of open digital innovation solutions 
(DigitalX).  
• Enhanced governance of technologies is needed now more than ever, to both create an 
enabling policy environment that supports innovation at scale, but also to anticipate and 
mitigate risk s and harms.  
 
• We must shift from siloed and fragmented digital solutions to strategic and holistic national 
digital transformation processes that also empower local ecosystems.  We need to develop 
inclusive and gender responsive digital transformation strategies and digital policies  that 
leave no one behind . 
 
3 
United Nations Development Programme  • Funding remains one of the biggest challenges for low -income countries to digitize. W e need 
to support governments to find the fiscal space to  invest in areas  such as digital ID an d 
digitalization of social protection systems,  digital  capacity -building , catalytic capital to 
support tech start -ups and social enterprises with SDG -aligned business models , and an 
enabling environment for digital equality and inclusive digital ecosystems.   
 
• People (and their rights) need to be at the  centre  of digital  ecosystems.   Universal access to 
the Internet does not automatically translate into digital equality.  The issue of protecting 
human rights  and particularly women’s rights  in the digital space is fundamental – human 
rights apply online as they do offline . We underline  that there  is a continuum between 
digital and analogue violence in which digital techno logies may amplify the risk and impact 
of gender -based violence.  
 
• Technology implementation must be accompanied by strong accountable institutions and 
governance arrangements that emb ed critical safeguards. Data frameworks and 
arrangements must be arranged to ensure and enable open, safe,  and secure use.  
 
• Human -centred  design and responsible application of technology must entail empowerment 
of people through legislation, increased capacity, and systems such as grievance redressal 
mechanisms attached to digital technologies used to deliver services, etc. This improves 
peoples’ understanding of, and exercise of their rights in the digital space.  
 
UNDP  has adopted rights -based digital (and data) standards for our organization, which are 
embedded across our programming and operations: https://www.undp.org/digital/standards . UNDP 
is also working on embedding digital rights in digital programmes across countries, including through 
the creation of a Digital Rights Dashboard , as well as strengthening AI preparedness and data 
governance.  
 
• We must acknowledge and recognize the digital/sustainability nexus. Digitalization can 
become an enabler for a green and resilient transition, as digital transition is closely 
intertwined with our climate future.  
 
• We must democratize the benefits of digita l technology by making the digital space more 
open, low -cost, and inclusive by encouraging the development of new business models that 
make even the most powerful technologies accessible everywhere. To do so , we need to 
understand and address overlapping s tructural barriers underlying  digital inequality – 
including poverty time, gender -based violence, wage inequality, unequal access to political 
opportunities, unequal access to employment and fair jobs, to name a few - that prevent 
women and other marginali zed populations’ access to and benefit from digital technologies 
for their social, economic,  and political advancement . 
 
• Strengthening capacity in the Global South is critical , to influence and participate in bilateral 
and multilateral global governance pro cesses  as well as build thriving local digital 
ecosystems.  
 
• As a multi -cause development problem, the digital divide should be approached with multi -
dimensional responses from access and affordability  to skills and education, content, 
security and privacy, and others.  
4 
United Nations Development Programme   
• We must  invest in a massive upscaling of digital capacity building, from basic skills to policy 
and governance of digitalization. We must accelerate support to significantly strengthen  
public sector capabilities to make sense of, and steer the direction of digital transformat ion, 
whilst also developing stronger public -private partnerships to drive inclusive digital 
transformatio n. 
  
• At the national -level, the onus lies with the highest leadership levels, to empower digital 
ministries and other accountable institutions (e.g. na tional digital agencies) to strengthen 
and innovate on governance arrangements, in the face of new technologies that require a 
whole -of-society approach.  
 
• A multistakeholder approach  is essential , and we must strengthen partnerships and 
coordination mechanisms between government agencies, civil society organizations and 
private sector entities to ensure progress towards digitalization efforts, bringing together all 
capabilities and resources as needed. This will also ensure that efforts a re not being 
duplicated.  
 
• It is critical to engage with and have  open and constructive dialogue  with the private sector 
– particularly with big tech firms  and Telcos -  in order to support effective and sustainable 
policy  responses, including those to expand connectivity, increase affordability of digital 
services and equipment, and create  incentives for women and other marginalized groups to 
be included in the digital economy.   
 
• At the same time,  commitments , accountability  and transparency from  the private sector in 
several key area s are critical . We need to continue advocating  for i) strong social protections 
in the countries they operate; ii) responsible , sustainable , and sound operations that respect 
human and women’s rights and address environmental impacts ; iii) address  of structural 
barriers  to women and   marginalized  populations’ access to  jobs in the tech industry; and 
(iv) develop ment of  digital products – especially those based on AI , machine learning 
technologies and emerging technologies - that do not exacerbate inequalities and that 
safeguard human rights.  
 
Through the Global Digital Compact ’s affirmation of an open, free and secure digital future for all, 
the international community should agree on a set of guiding principles for digital transformation 
as an empowering force for people and planet - being inclusive, people -centred, rights -based, 
gender -responsive , and environment -friendly.  
 
 
Useful Resources:  
• UNDP Digital Strategy https://digitalstrategy.undp.org/  
• UNDP Guiding Principles https://digitalstrategy.undp.org/#Guiding -Principles   
• Inclusive by Design: Accelerating Digital Transformation for the Global Goals  
https://www.undp.org/publications/inclusive -design -accelerating -digital -transformation -
global -goals   
• UNDP Digital Standard s (for best practice and skill building) - 
https://www.undp.org/digital/standards  
5 
United Nations Development Programme  • UNDP Governance Strategy  
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2022 -
07/GGP%20brochure%2016May.pdf  
• DigitalX Innovation Solutions catalogue - Digital X innovation solutions catalogue  
• Action Plan for Sustainability in the Digital Age  
https://www.sparkblue.org/codesactionplanlaunch   
• UNDP (2021). Gender equality in digitalization: key issues for programming. Regional Bureau 
for Europe and CIS. Istanbul Regional Hub 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/eurasia/UNDP -RBEC -Gender -
Equality -Digitalization -guidance.pdf  
• UNDP (2022). Human Development Report 2021/202 2, Uncertain times, unsettled lives: 
shaping our future in a transforming world 
https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/documents/global -report -document/hdr2021 -
22pdf_1.pdf  
• UNDP (2021). Global Knowledge Index 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/2022 -01/GKI%20Report%202021%20 -
%20CPs%203_Full%20 -%20EN.pdf  
• UNDP (2021). Accelerating universal digital connectivity. Policy brief. UNDP Regional Bureau 
for Asia and the Pacific . 
https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/migration/asia_pacific_rbap/UNDP -
RBAP -Accelerating -Universal -Digital -Connectivity -2021.pdf  
 
Relevant Data Resources :  
• UNDP – UN Women Cov id-19 Global Gender Response Tracker:  The COVID -19 Global 
Gender Response Tracker monitors responses taken by governments worldwide to tackle 
the pandemic, and highlights those that have integrated a gender lens. It captures two types 
of government respons es: women’s participation in COVID -19 task forces and national policy 
measures taken by governments. It analyzes which of the policy measures address women’s 
economic and social security, including unpaid care work, the labour market and violence 
against w omen.  https://data.undp.org/gendertracker/   
  
• UNDP Data Futures Platform : brings together data from the UN system and partners to 
advance integrated development solutions in support of the 2030 Agenda. The platform 
includes raw data sets, simulators and actionable insights, allowing users to both run their 
own estimation and access relevant analyses to inform policies, programmes and advocacy 
efforts.  https://data.undp.org/   
  
• Digital Development Compass:  exhaustive collection of a country’s digital indicators, 
sourced from publicly available datasets that we have aggregated and ma de usable for the 
first time. The DDC was first created as a tool for UNDP’s work in supporting inclusive, 
whole -of-society digital transformation with partners.  
https://data.undp.org/digitalcompass/    
6 
United Nations Development Programme    
• UNDP Rising Up for SIDS data platform:  The data and metadata from more than 20 publicly 
available statistical databases and research studies have been compiled and standardized 
into a comprehensive data product. We have strived to curate the data in order to feature 
reliable, accurate and comprehensive information across the many sectors of development 
most relevant to SIDS. The data can be sorted by dataset, category, and subcategory, and 
then visualized as a choropleth map, a global view, bar chart, and time series.  
https://data.undp.org/sids/portfolio  
 
• Digital Inclusion Navigator: The Navigator is a one -stop shop of curated, high -quality 
information, real -world case studies, leading best practices, and other evidence -based 
content from trusted sources developed together with UNDP, WEF and BCG . 
https://www.edisonalliance.org/navigator  
 
 
 