 
1 
National Submission of El Salvador on the Global Digital Compact proposed thematic areas  
 
The Global Digital Compact (GDC) should aim for Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) 
to be universal, accessible, free, and affordable. Hence interoperability, openness, and the global reach 
of the Internet are key to this goal.  
In the current context of multiple and interlinked crises, harnessing the potential of science, technology,  
and innovation, including digital technologies, is critical t o address the multidimensional challenges 
faced, in particular, by developing countries in their efforts to achieve the SDGs, recognizing that ICTs 
have the potential to provide solutions to the new and evolving development challenges. In that sense, 
concr ete actions and specific initiatives need to be implemented and harnessed through the GDC.  
For this goal,  the importance of creating synergies, preventing duplications, and building on 
existing initiatives cannot be overstated.  We maintain that the GDC sho uld build upon on forums 
already advancing in digital cooperation as the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the Office 
of the Envoy on Technology, the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), the AI ethics work of UNESCO, the 
World Summit on the Informat ion Society (WSIS) and the Secretary -General´s Roadmap for digital 
cooperation, as well other related processes in the General Assembly of the United Nations.  
We therefore call to create synergies and to take advantage of what the organization and other Me mber 
States have been doing for the last decade on connectivity, internet governance, data protection, 
artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies and ways to accelerate the progress of the SGDs. 
In this regard, knowledge sharing and strengthen ing multi stakeholder partnerships would be relevant.  
As core priorities for the achievement of the SDGs, technology transfer and capacity building for all 
developing countries should be ensured and improved in order to reduce existing gaps and to promote 
equal access and the use of ICTs.  
The GDC process should be, in this sense, an opportunity to revive and promote meaningful debate 
about the role ICTs play in our current world and how we can use these technologies to achieve 
sustainable development for a ll, in particular to tackle current global challenges.  
Another element that is highlighted across the thematic discussions is the need to continue the multi -
stakeholder  approach while preserving the  intergovernmental nature of a United Nations process and  
ensuring a  human right  centered approach.  
We, therefore, present key elements for some of the thematic deep -dives:  
1. Thematic areas proposals  
 
Digital inclusion and connectivity  
Bridge the digital divide including the gender divide  
Bridging the digital divid e means ensuring that everyone can use information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) to their advantage, and to have a pool of adequate tools available to become online 
 
2 
citizens. There is a direct link between digital and socioeconomic inequalities. Pr ior challenges arise 
when not everyone has access to digital technologies, including the internet.  
 
As highlighted in the Report of the Secretary -General related to the progress towards the SDGs, 
persistent digital dives among and within countries are a ma in challenge for the achievement of the 
SDGs. Leveraging the potential of technologies and ensuring connectivity for all requires investing in 
inclusive and accessible digital infrastructure .  
 
Digital inclusion also requires addressing the gender digital divide to reach - in access to and use of 
technologies and connectivity. Is also closely related to the opportunities enabled for all women and 
girls to access digital skills in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.  
 
Digital infrastructure  
The internet is about data but  is also about infrastructure. Therefore,  we suggest enhancing investment 
in digital infrastructure. This encompasses a dual approach from elements related to access to devices, 
like a computer or other relevant devices, and as infrastructure we refer to a reliable and secure internet 
environment.  
 
As we stated before, for digital inclusion to become a reality there must be a combination of factors 
working together to ensure not only affordable, high quality and stable connectiv ity but the basic tools 
(physical and social) to navigate in a highly connected environment.  
 
Digital literacy and training skills  
Digital skills training and digital literacy at all levels, and to all people  throughout their life cycle. The goal 
should be for everyone to have access to the internet, but also to have  the appropriate digital skills, 
relevant to their individual needs, so that they are able to utilize the media environments that provide 
the benefits they are looking for.  
 
For people already immersed in ICT environments, more educational resources are needed in STEM, 
cybersecurity, quantum computing, artificial intellige nce, and new and emerging technologies.  
 
It is through the development of digital capacities at all levels, we will be able to improve social and 
economic disparities and improve connectivity.  
 
Technology transfer and capacity building  
Taking advantage of  the positive contribution to tackle current challenges will require the adequate 
financial resources from all sources, including through capacity building and technology transfer to 
developing countries in order to  reduce existing gaps and promote equal a ccess in regard to  
connectivity. The establishment of more efficient and effective mechanisms for this purpose should be 
promoted and by strengthening and innovating existing initiatives to benefit in particular developing 
countries.  
 
Internet governance  
Multi-stakeholder and collaborative approach to Internet Governance  
 
3 
The understanding of the Internet as a decentralized platform is key. We refer specifically to the fact 
that no institution or entity holds sole power and control and where a multi -stakeho lder scheme 
(governments, the private sector, non -governmental organizations, international organizations, 
academia, and industry) collaborate together to develop an inclusive governance model for the internet's 
growth and development.  
Therefore,  we reaffirmed the importance of continuing the multi -stakeholder approach outlined in the 
Geneva Summit of 2003 and the Tunis Agenda of 2005. The purpose of this is to ensure that a wide 
range of interested and competent stakeholders can contribute to the  development of principles that 
mark the evolution of the Internet.  
On that line there is an urgent need to enhance and foster a more effective participation in particular of 
developing countries on the existing platforms related to internet governance, th rough which their 
interests and priorities could be considered.  
Data protection  
Human rights approach  
Crimes related to the use of unauthorized data are on the rise. Illegal  access to data causes harm to 
those who are affected by it. As a result, cybercri me relating to data threatens the privacy of hundreds 
of millions of individuals whose personal information is accessed without authorization, stolen, modified,  
or illegally used with malicious intent.  
 
Therefore, we highlight the States responsibilities t o address cybersecurity concerns, particularly to 
protect sensitive data to extend individual rights to cyberspace under national legal frameworks, as well 
into a broader scale safeguard national security interests.  
 
Protection of data in the context of in ternational security  
Unauthorized access to sensitive information at the government level can disrupt government systems, 
undermine public service provision, negatively affect the economy, compromise the very form of 
government,  and compromise the supply c hain, resulting in failures in the social function of States 
resulting in social discord and mistrust.  
 
For national, social, economic, and political stability, States must ensure the safekeeping of data and 
procurement of their digital infrastructure. Th is responsibility can also be translated as the responsibility 
of the government to protect citizens' data collected, managed,  and stored in a public environment to a 
greater degree.  
 
Multi -stakeholder approach on Data protection  
Private data protection can be upheld through a multi -stakeholder approach where everyone plays 
critical roles. By promoting international standards within existing frameworks, a multilateral approach 
can be achieved. On a national level, governments also have regulations that prevent service providers 
from obtaining, using,  and manipulating data. Those who provide services on data management and 
Internet Service Providers should adhere to strict regulations that prevent the improper use of sensitive 
inform ation.  
 
4 
 
Principles for interoperability of data  
We highlight for data interoperability the following principles: openness for data that isn't under 
protection and open source software, technology neutrality to avoid dependency and adapt needs to a 
rapidly  changing technological environment, data portability for reuse of data, transparency regarding 
processes and accessibility in order for all people, regardless of their specific needs, to have similar 
access to and use of ICT products.  
 
Digital trust and s ecurity  
Protection of digital critical infrastructures and digital information infrastructures  
In order for societies to function as they should, digital critical infrastructure, such as access to food, 
water, energy, and transportation, as well as social  services, should be protected and respected at all 
times. Critical health and education infrastructure should be respected in all circumstances. However, 
there is a need for Member States to discuss what embodies digital trust and security in order to sha pe 
a common understanding of what these terms encompass.  
 
Digital trust in their connection to data protection  
Digital trust is intrinsically connected with data protection, privacy and the empowerment and 
determination of individuals to make conscious de cisions about the recollection, storage, use and 
elimination of private information. Transparency in the collection and manipulation of data is 
fundamental and provides the user with sufficient power to manage personal data from a human rights 
perspective.  To advance digital trust, more multidisciplinary discussions and collaboration are needed.  
 
We also believe the misuse of ICTs poses a threat to digital trust in terms of potential risk and harm 
caused by all forms of online violence and abuse, which can aggravate the differential impacts of 
violence on women and children. In addition, it is necessary to address any type of discrimination caused 
by algorithm biases and other violations of human rights in the use of ICTs.  
 
In that sense, the GDC should tack le the continuity and interrelation between offline and online violence, 
harassment and discrimination against women and girls and the increase of such acts that are 
committed, assisted, aggravated or amplified by the use of technology, and it should urge governments 
and all stakeholders to take all appropriate measures, including legal or criminal action, to combat the 
use of digital tools, including social media and online platforms, for the purpose of harassment, hate 
speech and racism against women and girls.  
 
Artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies  
Innovation  
Digital transformation and innovation through AI applications development, implementation and use 
represent huge opportunities. Technologies emerging from the AI realm and other e merging tech can 
reduce gaps between countries and promote development, however they can also deepen inequalities 
and the digital divide. Multi -stakeholder cooperation is essential to ensure that current and future uses 
of AI are secure, peaceful, and sust ainable.  
 
AI applications related to international security  
 
5 
The increasing autonomy of certain AI applications is of major concern, particularly in areas of 
international security, weaponry development and transition to cyberspace warfare. Ethical and leg al 
implications should be fundamental in the development of AI applications particularly those that reduce 
or restrict human control in situations of life and death.  
 
Ethic uses of AI  
There must be a human -centered approach to AI applications development, so that they are based on 
human rights, are secure, safe, and sustainable; they should be beneficial to individuals, respect their 
dignity, and consider society's benefit as well.  
 
Global digital commons  
Universality of the Internet  
It is fundamental for the internet to be viewed as a public good, with functionality, security, openness, 
and stability being essential features. In order to prevent the open source and public nature of the 
Internet from diminishing, newly revitalized courses should be discusse d. As this presents accessibility 
issues for developing countries.  
 
Standardization and interoperability  
Standardization of frameworks for digital common goods is essential for improving accessibility, and 
interoperable data is also essential for allowing information to flow from different platforms with respect 
for privacy and elevated levels  of security.  
 
Accelerating progress on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  
ICTs towards the achievement of the SDGs  
Recognizing that information and communications technologies present new opportunities and benefits 
for the achievement of the SDGs, requi res addressing the major impediments that developing countries 
face in engaging with and accessing new and emerging technologies such as: appropriate enabling 
environment, sufficient resources, infrastructure, education, capacity, investment,  and connectiv ity.  
 
In that sense, in order to take advantage of the relevant role of ICTs towards the achievement of the 
SDGs, strong multi stakeholder partnerships are critical to improve the science, technology and 
innovation ecosystem working in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders to identify solutions to 
pressing development challenges.  
 
 