 
PERMANENT  MISSION  OF SINGAPORE  
TO THE  UNITED  NATIONS  
318  EAST  48TH STREET,  NEW  YORK,  NY 10017 
TEL:  (212)  826 0840   FAX:  (212)  826 2964  
 
 
INPUT BY THE RE PUBLIC OF SINGAPORE FOR THE GLOBAL 
DIGITAL COMPACT , 30TH  APRIL 20 23 
 
Singapore ’s input for the Glob al Digital Compact comprises all statements delivered 
by Singapore as part of the G lobal Digital Compact ’s consult ation process , including 
statements made at ea ch of the thematic deep -dives .  
 
This document currently contains the following statements deliv ered b y Singapore : 
 
• Singapore ’s statement delivered at the  first informal consultations on the 
Global Digital Compact on 30 January 2023  
 
• Singapore ’s statement  delivered  at the first thematic deep -dive on “digital 
inclusion and connectivity ” on 27 March 20 23 
 
• Singapore ’s statement delivered at the second thematic deep -dive on “internet 
governance ” on 13 April 20 23 
 
• Singapore ’s statement delivered at the third thematic deep -dive on “data 
protection ” on 24 April 2023  
 
This document will be updated as further statements are delivered by Singapore at 
upcoming thematic deep -dives taking place in May and June 2023 .   
 
PERMANENT  MISSION  OF SINGAPORE  
TO THE  UNITED  NATIONS  
318  EAST  48TH STREET,  NEW  YORK,  NY 10017 
TEL:  (212)  826 0840   FAX:  (212)  826 2964  
 
 
INTERVENTION BY AMBASSADOR BURHAN GAFOOR  OF 
SINGAPORE AT THE FIRST INFOMRAL CONSULATIONS ON THE 
GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT, TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL CHAMBER 
AT UNHQ, MONDAY, 30 JANUARY 202 3, 10.00AM.  
 
1 Co-facilitators, thank you for your work and thank you for convening this 
meeting. I'm very much in agreement with many of the comments that have been 
made. Let me first of all start b y endorsing the statement made by the Ambassador 
of Cuba, who has spoken for a large group of countries (i.e. the G77). We associate 
ourselves with that statement.  
 
2 I wanted to  give some reactions to some of the statements but also give some 
comments on the idea of a Global Digital Compact. First, I think the idea of a 
roadmap and the thematic deep dives will be very useful going forward. But I think 
for subsequent discussions i t might be useful to have some guiding questions from 
the co -facilitators so that we can have focused discussions.  
 
3 Second , there's been a lot of comments made with regard to digital literacy. I 
think it's important not only to elevate the level of digita l literacy here in New York, 
but also in our capitals, and therefore I think it is important to give time in between 
the sessions. If there is a way to loosen the roadmap to allow for adequate time, that 
will be very much useful without fundamentally alter ing the roadmap. I do like the 
idea of having advance notice of such a roadmap, but I think with the current 
schedule many of us would not be able to get sufficient guidance from capitals.  
 
4 Third , as we prepare for the Ministerial Meeting in September, it  will be useful 
to get updates from the different UN agencies and bodies, in terms of what they are 
doing in the digital domain. I think it is important to have that landscape survey of 
what is already being done by the UN system in the digital domain befo re we go into 
the deep dives on very specific issues. So that is a suggestion that I'm putting to the 
co-facilitators. The other suggestion I have is that it is important that in the 
preparation for the SDG Summit, we do an audit of the 17 SDG goals to see  how the 
digital dimension can accelerate the implementation of the 17 goals. And I would 
suggest that the two co -facilitators can also make a presentation at the SDG Summit 
itself to underline how the digital dimension can accelerate the implementation of  
the SDG goals, but also identify the gaps that have not allowed some of the  
 
2 implementation of the SDG goals. On education, the COVID -19 pandemic has 
shown us that digital technologies can be accelerated in terms of reaching larger 
segments of population t o deliver education, but it has also shown that infrastructure, 
access to computers, and digital divide are real problems. And therefore, I think it's 
worth thinking about bringing the digital discussion into the SDG Summit right at 
the outset.  
 
5 Now, let me now return to the topic of the Global Digital Compact. I would 
agree with those who have said that this must be action -oriented, it must be 
pragmatic, it must be policy -oriented. But it must also recognise the diversity of 
views and policies and systems  around the world. Let's not get into the classic UN 
debate about harmonising and therefore homogenising structures and systems and 
societies. I think it's important that we accept the diversity of views and systems. 
Having recognised that of course, we mu st try our best to protect human rights, 
freedom of expression, inclusiveness, etc. But it all must start from the recognition 
that we are coming together as representatives of sovereign countries representing 
very diverse systems, but we are all committed  to working together to find common 
ground. I think that's very important. Otherwise, my concern is that this process may 
become a proxy for some of the many difficult debates we had in other fora.  
 
6 Let me conclude with three aspects of the GDC which are very important for 
Singapore. One is inclusiveness. The second is innovation. And the third is 
interoperability. I have made these comments before in a different setting (the GOF 
on Digital Technologies meeting on 23 November 2022). I call them the three “ I”s.  
Inclusiveness means not just involving the stakeholders, but inclusiveness at the 
national level and at the global level, in terms of reaching out to every segment of 
society, every person on the planet, and the ideas of infrastructure, digital divid e, 
digital skills, and universal connectivity all becomes important.  
 
7 Second , the GDC must be a framework for innovation. It must facilitate 
innovation. It must encourage and empower innovation. That means talking to the 
private sector, or those who have innovative ideas because ultimately, we need them 
to be part of the solution.  
 
8 Thirdly , interoperability, which in a sense, relates to what the Secretary General 
said about fragmented systems, because if it's fragmented, it's not interoperable, and 
then w e end up in silos. That does not create trust, engender cooperation, or lead to 
a multilateral system, and we will end up having this series of plurilateral structures. 
And that is not what the United Nations is about. It is fundamentally about creating 
a multilateral framework.  
 
 
3 9 So these are some initial ideas. We look forward to participating actively in all 
the discussions. And once again, thank you for having volunteered to take up this 
herculean task, you have our support and we look forward to workin g with all 
delegations.  
 
.    .    .    .    .  
 
PERMANENT  MISSION  OF SINGAPORE  
TO THE  UNITED  NATIONS  
318  EAST  48TH STREET,  NEW  YORK,  NY 10017 
TEL:  (212)  826 0840   FAX:  (212)  826 2964  
 
 
INTERVENTION BY AMBASSADOR BURHAN GAFOOR OF 
SINGAPORE AT THE FIRST THEMATIC DEEP DIVE ON THE GLOBAL 
DIGITAL COMPACT ON THE ISSUE OF DIGITAL INCLUSION AND 
CONNECTIVITY, TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL CHAMBER AT UNHQ, 
MONDAY, 27 MARCH, 10.00AM.  
 
1 Thank you very much, co -facilitators. Singapore is delighted to join this 
thematic deep dive and looks forward to the various other dialogues that you will be 
organising as well. I also want to thank both of you for your leadership in structuring  
the discussions today around the topic of digital inclusion and connectivity and thank 
you also for your guiding questions.  
 
2 Last week, the UN had a very significant conference on water, and we learned 
that 2 billion people lack access to running water . Today we have heard from the 
Secretary General of ITU , an advocate on this issue , that  2.7 billion people lack 
access to the internet or any kind of digital services. Given this, the  issue that we are 
discussing in this room today is absolutely important . It is something that I think we 
as a diplomatic community in New York have not given the attention that it needs . I 
hope that this discussion on the Global Digital Compact  that you have launched , co-
facilitators,  will attract the serious attention this i ssue deserves . For Singapore, we 
look at the Global Digital Compact  as an accelerator for the implementation of the 
SDGs ; an accelerator for inclusivity, including all segments of society, and also as 
an accelerator for partnerships between governments and between governments and 
civil society and stakeholders, whether it  is the private sector or other civil society 
representatives . I want to acknowledge their participation  in this deep dive . I know 
many are joining the discussions virtually. Thank you v ery much for your 
engagement.  
 
3 Now, let me address some of the issues with regard to  digital  inclusion and 
connectivity. We think that the starting point for the Global Digital Compact  should 
be digital inclusion and connectivity. That would be a good way to build consensus 
around the Global Digital  Compact . In this regard, I want  to make a few points . 
 
4 First, the Global Digital Compact  must make a commitment to provide 
universal access and connectivity  to the internet by 2030. The Secretary -General of 
the ITU earlier spoke about the estimated cost of  doing so – about US$400 billion.  
 
2 But if we do not address this issue now the cost will continue to escalate. It is also 
important that we do not look at th is issue as a question of aid and assistance. This 
is not about aid and assistance. This is about investment and partnership , investing 
in our people and investing in our societies. It is on the basis of investment that we 
must build those partnerships. So  it is not a question of going around asking for aid 
and assistance . Nonetheless,  developing countries do need help in terms of building 
the partnerships and making the necessary investments. Now, there are certainly a 
lot of models for partnership with th e private sector and other actors. But beyond the 
financial aspects, we should also look at the non -financial barriers to universal and 
affordable access . In ASEAN , at the regional level, we have a digital master plan 
known as the ASEAN  Digital Master Plan 2025. Based on the experience we have 
had in ASEAN , many respondents  to a survey  conducted by the ASEAN Secretariat  
indicated that the real barriers to the deployment of digital infrastructure in ASEAN 
are not financial . This means that while  money is ava ilable for a good investment , 
the real barriers are often non -financial in terms of building the infrastructure , in 
terms of getting planning permissions , and i n terms of carrying out the various 
infrastructure projects  and feasibility stud ies. We should not underestimate the non -
financial barriers in this regard and I think that Singapore and ASEAN  can share 
experiences in this area .  
 
5 The second  point that I want  to make is that connectivity is also a  question of 
affordability. Many previous s peakers have raised this too. A ffordability relates to 
infrastructure, but it also relates to government policy . Fundamentally national 
authorities and governments have to be conscious about how they can ensure 
affordability and here we need to be open to a variety of approaches. In some cases, 
this will require a telecommunication s sector that is fully liberalised as is the case in 
Singapore. We have a very competitive telecommunication s sector for mobile 
operators. I think it is important to achieve that level of competition and private 
sector participation in order to achieve high standards for the consumer. For 
example, in Singapore, the average person pays less than US$0. 50 per gigabyte for 
mobile internet , while enjoying one of the fastest internet ser vices in the world. 
Nonetheless, there  is no one size fits all  approach and  every country needs to find its 
own path. This is where we need to recognise that different countries will have 
different approaches and not try and adopt a cookie cutter approach.  In this regard,  
the Global Digital Compact  can provide a platform for exchange of best practices. I 
think that will be the value of the Global Digital Compact .  
 
6 My third  point is about inclusivity. Inclusivity is of course about  including 
different seg ments of society and the population, but the key to inclusivity at the 
global level is interoperability. In other words, if we all have 193 different national 
systems that operated according to its own sets of standards and regulations, we will 
 
3 not be glob ally inclusive because the different national systems will not be able to 
communicate and connect with each other. If we want to be truly inclusive at the 
global level, we must work on interoperability.  This is where I think the Global 
Digital Compact  can put forward elements or ideas on how we can make our systems 
interoperable so that the different systems can communicate with each other , so that 
data can flow  between systems, and so that there can be digital services provided 
between countries . I want to  cite one example . This year in Februar y, Singapore and 
India launched  a linkage between our respective national payments systems 
(PayNow in Singapore and UPI in India)  that will allow anyone in India  plus anyone 
in Singapore  to make payments to each other with a tap of their phone  and with a 
click of a button. I think this really allows people in both countries to access services 
in each other's countries in a remarkable way. That , I think , is very exciting for our 
two countries , and we hope as Singapore that we  will be able to have such 
partnerships with as many countries as possible.  
 
7 The fourth  point  I want to make with regard to inclusivity and connectivity is 
digital literacy and skills. In Singapore, we promote digital s kills for daily living and 
digital skills for employability, businesses, and education. These cater to citizens of 
all ages: through our National Digital Literacy programme for our children, Skills 
Framework for Infocomm Technology for our workforce, Senio rs Go Digital 
programme for our elderly. More fundamentally, however, it is necessary to 
recognize that our citizens need to first have access to inclusively designed digital 
services that take their needs into account, through the use of which they can go  on 
to build their digital literacy, competencies and skills. In this regard, it is important 
to think in terms of global best practices for the inclusive provision of government 
digital services. The Global Digital Compact can help to provide guidelines o r best 
practice standards that governments can adopt voluntarily in order to enhance their 
own service delivery in a way to maximises inclusivity. In Singapore, all government 
e-services are required to follow a set of Digital Service Standards to ensure t hat 
digital services are accessible and user -friendly to meet the needs of diverse user 
groups, including the elderly and the less -abled. Our Digital Service Standards are 
also guided by the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, an internationally adopted 
standard for digital accessibility. We can consider similar efforts at the international 
level as part of the GDC. Together, we can commit to ensuring that government e -
services lead the way in inclusivity, and in this way we can set a benchmark and an 
example for others in the digital ecosystem to follow.  
 
8 These are some of our initial ideas. This is an exciting and important topic and 
Singapore will continue to participate actively in these  discussions. Thank you.  
 
.    .    .    .    .  
 
1 
 
PERMANENT  MISSION  OF SINGAPORE  
TO THE  UNITED  NATIONS  
318  EAST  48TH STREET,  NEW  YORK,  NY 10017 
TEL:  (212)  826 0840   FAX:  (212)  826 2964  
 
 
INTERVENTION BY FIRST SECRETARY MATTHEW WONG OF 
SINGAPORE AT THE SECOND THEMATIC DEEP DIVE ON THE 
GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT ON THE ISSUE OF INTERNET 
GOVERNANCE, TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL CHAMBER AT UNHQ, 
THURSDAY, 13 APRIL, 10.00AM  
 
1 Thank you very much, co -facilitators. I would like to thank you both for 
convening these discussions today and for the guiding questions you have provided.  
 
2 Given the internet’s status as a shared global digital infrastructure and its role 
as a key enable r of digitalization, Singapore believes it is essential that the internet 
remains open, secure and interoperable. We must ensure that our internet governance 
mechanisms work in service of these goals. While governments have an important 
role to play in int ernet governance, Singapore believes that internet governance must 
be inclusive and responsive to be fully effective. Governments, industry, civil 
society and other stakeholders must work together to shape the development of the 
internet for the benefit of  all. 
 
3 In this regard, allow me to offer some ideas on how the Global Digital Compact 
(GDC) can help to re -affirm, re -vitalise, and re -energise our approach to internet 
governance.  
 
4 First, the GDC should encourage efforts to ensure that our internet governance 
mechanisms are truly global in nature. In this regard, Singapore supports the G77’s 
statement that we should maximize the participation of developing countries in 
decisions regarding  Internet governance. Singapore welcomes the work of the 
various IGF regional initiatives, as well as ICANN’s decision in 2013 to begin 
establishing regional hubs. In this regard, Singapore is proud to have hosted the 2022 
meeting of the Asia Pacific Regio nal IGF. Nonetheless, while the geographic 
expansion of institutions is welcome, it is not sufficient. We need to strengthen 
capacity -building and knowledge -sharing to ensure that policymakers, stakeholders 
and citizens from around the world, particularly those from developing countries, 
LDCs, and SIDS, are able to participate fully, equally and meaningfully in these 
discussions. The UN – as an inclusive multilateral platform where all States, both 
large and small, have a voice – can play a crucial role in this regard.    
 
2  
5 Second , the GDC should reiterate the importance of digital inclusion and the 
acceleration of the SDGs as a key focus of internet governance mechanisms. While 
internet governance matters may be technical, they also have significant real -world 
impact on our ability to achieve these goals. ICANN’s work on Internationalized 
Domain Names and Universal Acceptance is a significant positive example in this 
regard. In 2010, ICANN introduced the first internationalized top -level domains, 
allowing doma in names to be fully written in non -Latin scripts. In 2011, Singapore 
introduced national top -level domains in Chinese and Tamil, allowing speakers of 
these languages to access the internet in a more inclusive way. However, even today, 
not all software is able to handle such queries appropriately, and as such we welcome 
ICANN’s continued work promoting what is known as the Universal Acceptance 
principles. As was the case in this example, our internet governance mechanisms 
should be encouraged and empowered to make technical decisions in support of our 
broader sustainable development goals.  
 
6 Third , the GDC should reiterate the importance of interoperability as a key 
principle of internet governance. Three weeks ago, at our previous deep dive, 
Singapore spoke about the importance of ensuring that government digital services 
are not developed in national silos, but are instead designed to communicate and 
operate across systems and across borders. The same can be said for private -sector 
applications and services.  While divergence and variation are a crucial factor for 
innovation, it is also important to ensure that users and information can move 
between and beyond individual technological ecosystems to ensure that all citizens 
and businesses can benefit from the f ull potential of the internet.   
 
7 These are some of our initial ideas, and we look forward to continuing this 
conversation today and in the weeks ahead. Thank you.  
 
 
.    .    .    .    .  
 
 
1 
 
PERMANENT  MISSION  OF SINGAPORE  
TO THE  UNITED  NATIONS  
318  EAST  48TH STREET,  NEW  YORK,  NY 10017 
TEL:  (212)  826 0840   FAX:  (212)  826 2964  
 
INTERVENTION BY FIRST SECRETARY MATTHEW WONG OF 
SINGAPORE AT THE THIRD THEMATIC DEEP DIVE ON THE GLOBAL 
DIGITAL COMPACT ON THE ISSUE OF DATA PROTECTION, 
TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL CHAMBER AT UNHQ, MONDAY, 24 APRIL 
2023, 10.00AM  
 
1 Thank you to the co -facilitators for convening today’s discussions and for your 
guiding questions.  
 
2 Given the role of data as a critical resource in the digital domain, Singapore 
believes that any data protection regime must be balanced and well -calibra ted, 
ensuring both the protection of individuals’ data while supporting the use of data for 
innovation and growth. At the international level, it is imperative that we have 
international systems that can smoothly facilitate cross -border data transfers whil e 
also ensuring that personal data transferred across borders continues to be adequately 
protected.  
 
3 In line with the G77 and China’s call for a meaningful, action -oriented Global 
Digital Compact (GDC) that can accelerate the achievement of the SDGs, we  
propose three concrete initiatives the GDC could adopt to allow us to seize the 
opportunities afforded by data in a responsible and well -regulated way.  
 
4 First, the GDC should encourage the development of tools and processes that 
enable innovators to ex tract value from datasets while ensuring the protection of 
personal data. These tools could be developed as digital public goods by UN 
agencies in partnership with interested States and stakeholders, and could be made 
freely available globally. The develop ment of common global tools could also help 
facilitate cross -border data sharing by providing assurances that datasets have been 
anonymised, encrypted or otherwise protected to a sufficiently high standard. Allow 
me to share some examples of such initiativ es that we are developing in Singapore. 
We have developed a Basic Anonymisation tool and guide to help organizations 
carry out basic anonymization of datasets. We are also working with trusted 
providers of Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PETs) as part of o ur PET Sandbox 
programme, which allows companies in Singapore to experiment with PETs in a 
supportive regulatory environment. We would be happy to share our experiences in 
more detail and work with the international community on the development of 
addition al useful tools.   
 
2  
5 Second , the GDC should take action to promote interoperability between 
various regional data sharing initiatives. As an example, consider the case of Model 
Contractual Clauses or Standard Contractual Clauses. These are template contra ctual 
terms that can be included in legal agreements between businesses to facilitate cross -
border data transfers. Within ASEAN, we have developed the ASEAN Model 
Contractual Clauses for Cross -Border Data Flows, which can be used by firms 
operating across ASEAN. Other regional organizations have also developed similar 
initiatives. However, while such initiatives can facilitate cross -border data flows at 
the regional -level, more work is needed to ensure the global interoperability of these 
initiatives. In th is regard, the UN could serve as a platform to bring together these 
various regional initiatives to explore possibilities for cooperation and 
harmonization.   
 
6 Third , the GDC should facilitate and encourage the development of global 
initiatives to facili tate cross -border data flows. Allow me to share one example as 
inspiration. In April 2022, Singapore , together with partners in APEC , co-founded 
the Global Cross Border Privacy Rules (CBPR) Forum to build upon and expand the 
APEC CBPR certification mechanism originally developed by the AP EC 
economies. Our ambition is for the Global CBPR Forum to be an inclusive global 
mechanism for cross -border data sharing certification, and we invite all interested 
States to join the Global CBPR Forum. We would also be happy to share our 
experiences in m ore detail, which could help inform the further development of such 
initiatives under UN auspices.   
 
7 These are some of our initial proposals for concrete initiatives the GDC could 
adopt, and we look forward to continuing this discussion in the weeks ahe ad. Thank 
you.  
 
.    .    .    .    .  
 