A Brighter Digital Tomorrow: 
An equitable digital future 
built for, with and by today's 
children and young peopleUNICEF
© UNICEF/UN0610423/Vu
Table of Contents
Introduction02
03
04
06
08
10
12
14
17U-Report
Inputs and 
Recommendations
• Universal connectivity is critical for an inclusive digital future, 
where all people can participate
• Children’s rights and safety should be explicitly prioritized 
and protected in digital environments
• All children and youth must have the agency and resources 
to meaningfully participate in a digital future
• Accountability criteria for discrimination and misleading 
content should be introduced
• Internet fragmentation needs to be avoided to ensure an 
open, free, inclusive, and secure digital future
• Digital commons, including technologies and services (both 
existing and emerging), must be accessible, equitable and 
safe for all children and youth
• Introduce a commons-approach to data governance to 
protect sovereignty and productive capacity by realizing data 
as a shared resource for inclusive benefits also for children
An equitable digital future needs 
tomorrow’s voice, today.
The world’s digital future must be defined, designed, and 
decided for, with and by those to be most impacted by it: 
children, youth and future generations. We must ensure that 
we amplify the voices of influence for children and youth as 
well as assure their rights, interests and opportunities are 
promoted and protected  now and into the future. 
It is imperative that UNICEF takes a leading 
role in raising the voice of young people all 
over the world to ensure full engagement and 
participation in the process that will shape 
their digital future.  
In September 2021, the United Nations 
Secretary-General released his report Our 
Common Agenda.  The Common Agenda 
proposes a Global Digital Compact (GDC) 
to be agreed at the Summit of the Future in 
September 2024. As part of the process of 
preparing the GDC, the United Nations 
Secretariat, through the Secretary-General's 
Envoy on Technology, is supporting the 
Co-facilitators, Rwanda and Sweden, who 
are leading the intergovernmental process on 
the GDC. During the preparatory phase of the 
GDC, all stakeholders have been invited to 
provide their input.
More information about the GDC and the 
process to develop the Compact can be 
accessed here.This document is UNICEF's submission 
to the preparatory phase of the GDC 
process. It has been developed 
collaboratively through co-drafting and 
co-editing as well as through the organization 
of deep dive sessions on specific topics that 
are relevant to the GDC from a UNICEF 
mandate’s lens.  
UNICEF has also organized a U-Report poll 
to gather input from young people on their 
views of their digital future.  
02Introduction
UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
https://www.un.org/techenvoy/global-digital-compact
28%
of respondents feel that they 
have much control on how 
technology will impact their 
life over the next decade.  
While 6/10 of female 
respondents report that they 
feel they have some control 
on how technology will impact 
their life in the next decade 
only 4/10 male respondents 
share this sentiment. Bringing Children & Youth Voices to the GDC consultation: 
UNICEF Office of Innovation and UNSG’s 
Youth Envoy collaboration with U-Report1 
0329%
of the respondents think the 
most important issues for 
the future of digital 
technology is that everyone 
can access the internet. 
This is followed by  control 
of their own data  and 
information (21%) and the 
protection of their human 
rights online  (15%).To better understand young people’s 
sentiments and concerns about the future of 
digital technologies, and how much control 
they feel they have to shape the digital 
future, UNICEF’s U-Report Global Platform 
and country office platforms launched a 
one-month global consultation together with 
the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth. Over 80,000 young people from 32 countries 
participated in the consultation. Of these 
respondents, 59,10% identified as male, 
40,88 identified as female and 0,02% 
identified as non-binary. It can also be noted 
that 39.6% of the U-Reporters who 
responded were 24 years old or younger.
Looking at the results, it can be seen that:
41%
said that when they think 
about how technology will 
change the world over the 
next decade, they are 
mostly worried. 
Just over 37% of male 
respondents said that they 
are mostly worried, around  
46% of the female 
respondents said that 
they are mostly worried. 
The U-Report poll data reflects the information provided by the respondents, and is not 
statistically representative of young people globally, or in any specific country or region. It does 
provide a snapshot of young people’s view on the future of digital technologies and how much 
control they feel they have to shape the digital future. For full results of the poll, see this annex. 
UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 20231Only around a quarter of the respondents do not feel 
particularly worried or excited about the potential impact of 
technology in the future. 
https://unicef.sharepoint.com/:p:/r/teams/OOI-Venture/Ventures%20Shared%20Folder/Global%20Digital%20Compact/Public%20Submission%20-%20GDC/U-Report%20Digital%20Compact%20Poll%20Report_v1.pptx?d=we024d82d2c5c4ff58966df555f41be67&csf=1&web=1&e=H5pEUa
Overview of key proposed inputs and 
recommendations from UNICEF 
1.Universal connectivity is critical for 
an inclusive digital future, where all 
people can participate. 
2.7 billion people are still 
offline and 96% of these 
people live in developing 
countries. Of those who are 
unconnected, 1.3 billion of 
them are children with no 
access to the Internet at home 
and only half of the world’s 
schools are online.This digital exclusion particularly affects the 
poorest, girls, and those with disabilities; 
causing learners to miss out on the resources 
online, the option to learn remotely (e.g. 
during pandemics or instability), and the 
opportunity to develop digital skills. This lack 
of connectivity means that many children 
have fewer opportunities to learn and fulfil 
their potential. Closing this digital divide 
requires global cooperation, leadership, and 
innovation in finance and technology. 
04UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023© UNICEF/UN070230/Chisiza
Giga: Connecting the dots    
OECD: Connecting every school in the 
world to internet
The Digital Transformation of learning: 
Connecting schools, empowering learners 
UNICEF: Internet Connectivity at home 
factsheet 
Meaningful school connectivity : An 
assessment of Sustainable Business models 
Connecting Learners: Narrowing the 
education divide 
Africa CDC: Digital Transformation 
Strategy   
WHO: Global Health Facilities Database 
(GHFD)  
WHO: Digital Clearing House Programmes  
Global Fund:  Digital Health Impact 
Accelerator  (DHIA) 
Resilient and Sustainable Systems for 
Health (RSSH) Programmes 
USAID: Digital Invest Initiative 
 Recommendations
Recognize reliable access to connectivity 
and thus to digital information as a new 
universal child/human right. 
Ensure that connectivity is safe, 
sustainable, and equitable  by leveraging 
cross-sectoral initiatives, such as Giga 
(UNICEF and ITU), to implement the 
policies, regulations, technologies, and 
financing required.  
Connect schools to allow children to 
develop digital skills and access online 
learning content. Schools can also become 
anchor points for surrounding communities. 
Ensure connectivity to critical physical 
infrastructure, such as schools and 
health centres, in order to make digitally 
enabled services accessible and affordable 
to the most marginalized communities. Sources of Knowledge
05UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
There is vast potential in the digital 
environment for realizing children’s rights,
for example their rights to education, 
healthcare, and play. At the same time, 
digital technologies may contribute to the 
violation of children’s rights, for example, 
their rights to privacy and protection from 
violence, exploitation and abuse. 
The rapid uptake and development of 
digital technologies have not been 
accompanied by the legislation, services, 
and education required to ensure its safe 
and empowering use.
This has left children 
vulnerable to serious harm. In 
low/middle-income countries 
surveyed by UNICEF, up to 
20% of internet-using children 
experienced online sexual 
abuse in the last year.Online risks can be substantial even in 
countries where internet access is low, 
highlighting the importance of investing in 
child protection efforts at an early stage of a 
country's digital transformation. These efforts 
should be guided by the goal of ensuring that 
the digital environment serves children’s best 
interests, respects their rights, and actively 
supports their well-being. 
Recommendations
The rights of every child must be 
respected, protected and fulfilled in the 
digital environment, as set out in General 
Comment 25 by the UN Committee on the 
Rights of the Child. Digital environments 
that work for adults may create risks for 
children. To ensure that such risks do not 
remain invisible, dedicated efforts are 
required to identify and address child rights 
impacts. Governments should ensure that 
the best interest of every child is a primary 
consideration in the provision, regulation, 
design, management and use of digital  
06Children’s rights and safety should 
be explicitly prioritized and 
protected in digital environments.   
UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 20232.© UNICEF/UNI320494/Elias
UN CRC General Comment 16 on State 
obligations regarding the impact of 
business on children’s rights 
UNICEF Office of Research – Innocenti: 
Children’s Experiences of Online Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse in 12 Countries in 
Eastern and Southern Africa and 
Southeast Asia 
UNICEF: Ending online child sexual 
exploitation and abuse: Lessons learned 
and promising practices in low- and 
middle-income countries 
WeProtect & UNICEF: Framing the future : 
How the Model National Response framework 
is supporting national efforts to end child 
sexual exploitation and abuse online 
UNICEF: Legislating for the digital age : 
Global guide on improving legislative 
frameworks to protect children from online 
sexual exploitation and abuse Policies and interventions designed to 
protect children’
s rights in the digital 
environment should be based on 
regularly updated data and research. 
Governments and others should collect 
robust, comprehensive data to understand 
the implications of the digital environment for 
children’s lives, including by conducting 
national-level research on children’s lived 
experiences of the digital environment, 
should be collected. This research should 
include an assessment of how national 
systems are responding to 
technology-facilitated crimes against children 
to construct an evidence-based roadmap for 
improving prevention and response. technologies, and ensure due weight is
given to children’s own views across
these efforts. 
Legislation should be in line with 
international human rights standards and 
protect children from recognized and 
emerging risks of violence in the digital 
environment. Governments should update 
and enforce legislation to protect children 
from all forms of technology-facilitated 
violence including online child sexual 
exploitation and abuse. 
All businesses have a responsibility to 
respect children’s rights within the digital 
environment, in line with the UN Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human 
Rights. To meet their responsibility to respect 
children’s rights, businesses should 
undertake child rights due diligence, including 
child rights impact assessments in relation to 
the digital environment. In addition to 
preventing and mitigating all online harms, 
businesses should strive to proactively 
support child well-being through their digital 
products and services.
Children must have access to justice and 
remedies for violations of their rights 
relating to the digital environment. 
Governments should ensure that appropriate 
and effective remedial judicial and 
non-judicial mechanisms for the violations of 
children’s rights relating to the digital 
environment are widely known and readily 
available to all children and their 
representatives. Remedial mechanisms must 
be designed with children’s requirements in 
mind to ensure their effectiveness as children 
face particular challenges in accessing 
justice. 
07Sources of Knowledge
UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
All children and youth must have the 
agency and resources to meaningfully 
participate in a digital future.  
Children constitute one-third 
of all users of digital 
technologies  and in 
low/middle-income countries 
this percentage is even 
higher. In the process of 
negotiating the GDC, it should 
be ensured that the compact 
speaks for multiple 
demographics and for the 
plurality of people that the 
GDC will seek to serve.Therefore, it must be ensured that all norms, 
principles and values related to digital are 
child-sensitive, catering to all, especially 
those youngest and most vulnerable across 
the globe, including paying specific attention 
to addressing the gender digital divide and 
how girls tend to have both less access to 
digital technologies and lower digital literacy 
compared to boys. 
The main constituents affected by digital 
solutions of the future must be proactively 
and equitably included in the processes of 
designing and developing these solutions. 
Young people’s enthusiasm for technology’s 
positive social impact potential must be 
unequivocally supported. It is imperative that 
UNICEF takes a leading role in raising the 
voice of children and young people all over 
the world to ensure full engagement and 
participation in the process that will shape 
their digital future. This also calls for new 
funding and investments to be directed 
toward emerging markets to enable young 
people as digital solution makers.  
 
08UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 20233.© UNICEF/UN0551725/Dejongh

UN CRC General Comment 25 on 
children’s rights in relation to the digital 
environment 
UNICEF Innocenti:
Child Rights in the Digital Age 
UNICEF: Policy Guidance on AI for 
Children 
UNICEF: What we know about the digital 
gender divide for girls Recommendations
Ensure meaningful youth participation by 
recognizing young people as right 
holders and provide them with the 
necessary education and protection to 
engage safely and effectively. For 
example, through digital platforms such as 
UNICEF’s U-Report. 
Establish a new global governance board, 
with young people and children included, 
focused on digital technologies and 
access to related rights, especially in light 
of recent calls for global artificial intelligence 
(AI) governance frameworks. This will ensure 
that future generations' needs and 
perspectives are represented in both 
discussions and decision-making around 
digital governance, fostering more effective 
and inclusive governance frameworks. 
Foster diversity and inclusion by 
ensuring inclusiveness, gender balance, 
accessibility, and the engagement of 
youth who are traditionally underserved, 
including youth with disabilities. This 
includes facilitating opportunities for 
participatory decision-making and working 
with youth-led organizations as core 
partners, as well as addressing gender 
norms restricting girls’ access. 
Address inequalities in the lives of 
children to get the most out of digital 
inclusion efforts. In UNICEF’s child-centred 
digital equality framework, a holistic 
approach from ‘inclusion’ in technological 
terms to ‘equality’ in developmental and 
well-being outcomes is recommended. This can be achieved by, for example, 
setting key performance indicators to 
gauge how digital inclusion efforts 
contribute to equality in outcomes for 
children, such as in education, well-being 
and safety, and empowerment. 
Diversify and redirect global Venture 
Capital flows and investments  into 
emerging markets , to strengthen 
innovation ecosystems and opportunities 
for young entrepreneurs and innovators 
access global markets. 
Social-impact oriented digital 
entrepreneurs, and their ecosystems, 
must be proactively and equitably 
included in the processes of designing 
and developing digital solutions of the 
future. Technical and financial resources 
to support young people’s enthusiasm for 
technology’s positive social impact should 
be intentionally redistributed to emerging 
ecosystems. 
Sources of Knowledge
09UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
Accountability criteria for 
discrimination and misleading content 
should be introduced. 
The Secretary-General noted 
in Our Common Agenda that 
the ability of digital 
technologies to be used to 
cause large-scale 
disinformation is an existential 
risk to humanity. Since then, 
advances in AI have only 
amplified this risk.The ability 
for AI to instantly generate 
text-based disinformation that 
is indistinguishable from 
human-generated content has 
been established. Synthetic content (text, image, audio and 
video) can now potentially be personalized to 
individual users to maximize persuasion and, 
as a result, be harder to combat by 
automated and human moderators. 
The same concerns hold for the future of 
other automatically created harmful content, 
including hate speech, online harassment, 
propaganda and increasingly realistic – and 
misleading – deepfakes. The deleterious 
effect of an internet flooded with misleading 
content is an erosion in trust as the 
authenticity of all content is questioned.   
Current forecasts are that AI tools will only 
become more effective at human-like content 
generation, that bad actors will likely leverage 
open-source versions that can be trained on 
harmful content and deployed without safety 
guardrails, and that certain nation states may 
invest in the technology themselves. 
10UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 20234.© UNICEF/2022/Le Vu
UNICEF: Digital Misinformation/ 
disinformation and children  
Generative Language Models and 
Automated Influence Operations: 
Emerging Threats and Potential Mitigations  
ChatGPT: The impact of Large Language 
Models on Law Enforcement 
Artificial Intelligence Can Persuade 
Humans on Political Issues Recommendations Sources of KnowledgeAs active digital users, mis/disinformation is 
very much part of children’s lives. With their 
cognitive capacities still in development 
children are particularly vulnerable to the 
risks of mis/disinformation and a more 
complex, corroded and harmful information 
ecosystem is of great concern. Require technology companies to undergo 
regular public audits of their algorithms, AI 
systems, content policies and 
mis/disinformation moderation practices 
concerning children’s use of their services 
and products.  
Devise regulations and codes of conduct 
to protect children from harmful 
mis/disinformation, while enabling 
children to safely access diverse content. 
Regulation should focus on requiring 
procedures for classifying content and 
ensuring transparency and accountability, 
over defining what constitutes harmful 
content and mis/disinformation (except in 
extreme cases such as child sexual abuse 
material). The latter approach can be 
misused to censor and restrict access to 
information.
In the case of virtual environments, regulation 
and codes of conduct need to develop 
accountability criteria not only for content but 
also behaviour as avatars (human or AI 
driven) interact with each other. Regulation 
may consider “hold points” where 
advancement in technology development is 
paused if there are precautionary concerns 
around unknown risks.  
Broadly require greater transparency, 
accountability and global responsibility 
from technology companies around 
mis/disinformation and children. Relevant 
companies now include not only content 
distributors, such as social media platforms, 
but those whose tools generate content. 
11UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
Internet fragmentation needs to be 
avoided to ensure an open, free, 
inclusive, and secure digital future. 
The internet has never been as fragmented 
as it is today. This splintering undermines the 
possibility of an open, free, inclusive and 
secure digital future on a number of levels. 
Uneven and patchwork internet governance 
poses a significant risk to children and young 
people's rights in the digital environment. 
Their rights to access to information, 
education, and healthcare are increasingly 
dependent on connectivity, and their 
freedoms of expression and peaceful 
assembly (both online and offline) are 
hindered by censorship and surveillance. 
This also impacts the most disadvantaged 
children disproportionately, particularly those 
with disabilities, who often lack access to the 
resources needed to bridge the technology 
divide.  
In light of these challenges, it is important to 
note that young people see internet 
fragmentation as closely linked to growing 
technology disparities.Therefore, the GDC needs to work for 
young people by aiming to bridge the 
technology divide, reduce risks associated 
with uneven internet governance, and 
promote a more equitable and democratic 
digital society for all.
The trend towards greater 
fragmentation is not going 
unchallenged and can be 
reversed. Children and youth 
are the most active internet 
user cohort; the battle today 
for the future of the internet 
will determine whether it 
empowers them, or becomes 
a tool used against them. 
12UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 20235.© UNICEF/2017/Georgiev
UNICEF: Prospects for Children in the 
Polycrisis: A 2023 Global Outlook 
Freedom House:  Freedom on the Net 2022
UNICEF: Changing Childhood  Project 
 Recommendations
Support opportunities for a range of 
stakeholders, including children and 
young people, to rally against internet 
fragmentation. Such efforts should include 
establishment of government alliances for a 
shared vision of a unified internet, civil 
society calls for oversight and regulation of 
digital surveillance tools, and youth 
movements against digital products and 
services that undermine their well-being. 
Facilitate knowledge sharing and 
alignment between governments, for 
example, highlighting those that model 
positive approaches to internet governance 
by developing child-centred regulations. The 
pattern of spill-over of regulations in one 
geography to others, such as being seen with 
the EU’s GDPR or the UK’s Age-Appropriate 
Design Code, can be leveraged. 
Develop a roadmap on how the 
multilateral system can nurture a unified 
internet. Task the new global governance 
board, recommended in the previous section 
on the meaningful participation of youth in a 
digital future, with the development of a plan 
on how the international community can act 
as a force for a unified internet. 
Build evidence on drivers of policy 
formulation and implementation that 
promotes the right to access to information, 
education and healthcare through 
connectivity for children and young people 
across countries and regions. 
 Sources of Knowledge
13UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
Digital commons, including technologies 
and services (both existing and emerging), 
must be accessible, equitable and safe for 
all children and youth.  
Digital commons must 
become and remain 
accessible, equitable, and 
safe to use for everyone. 
Furthermore, children and young people 
should be empowered to participate in digital 
ecosystems in an equitable way, including by 
having their skills and capacity developed, 
and provided systemic ways to contribute to 
the development and maintenance of digital 
commons. 
Currently, the digital commons face a range 
of challenges such as commercialization and 
inequitable participation. Millions of children 
and young people, especially in low/middle- 
income countries are digitally excluded, 
which exacerbates existing inequalities. Shared digital public goods (DPGs), as 
defined by the Digital Public Goods Alliance 
(DPGA), have been recognized as an 
accelerator for children’s rights and the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 
are therefore a vital part of the digital 
commons. DPGs can support governments 
and other partners to build Digital Public 
Infrastructure (DPI) in a more equitable, 
transparent, and inclusive way. Open and 
accessible DPI as part of the digital common 
also serve as a foundation for vibrant digital 
innovation ecosystems by young 
entrepreneurs. 
DPI also opens alternative approaches to the 
governance and use of data generated by 
(and through) the use of DPI, approaches 
that promise a more equitable distribution of 
benefits derived from such data ( see next 
section on the Data Commons ).
14UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 20236.© UNICEF/UNI317552/Frank Dejongh
While the potential of DPGs for building DPI 
is increasingly recognized, a range of 
challenges remain, including 
misconceptions about open-source, lack of 
sustainable funding/business models and 
unclear/nontransparent governance. 
Consequently, the potential of the digital 
commons for the SDGs is not fully realized. 
As a co-founder of the DPGA, UNICEF 
supports the discovery, maintenance, and 
implementation of DPGs that support the 
achievement of children’s rights, for 
example in areas such as health, 
education, and social protection. UNICEF 
supports the Secretary-General’s vision of 
reclaiming the digital commons to ensure 
an inclusive and equitable digital future for 
everyone, including children. 
Recommendations
To fully realize the potential of digital 
commons for the SDGs, UNICEF 
recommends the following actions: 
Create inclusive governance models for 
DPGs for DPI and the digital commons. 
Governance is central to reclaiming the 
digital commons and specifically for 
successful long-term maintenance of 
DPGs that can benefit children.
Creating a coherent and interoperable 
ecosystem of DPGs for DPI, including 
collective ownership modalities, will require 
more coordination and transparent 
governance to ensure multi-stakeholder 
participation. Incentive structures for 
everyone to participate in and contribute 
back to DPGs need to be designed. Develop new financing mechanisms for 
DPGs. The GDC should put forward 
improved finance mechanisms for the 
maintenance of key foundational DPGs for 
children, such as health, education, social 
and child protection systems. These 
mechanisms could include multi-donor or 
interagency shared funds. Viable business 
models for DPGs, such as SaaS models, 
should be further researched and lessons 
learned should be shared. Private sector 
actors need to recognize the value of open 
systems and dedicate resources 
appropriately.
This requires a mindset shift from all involved 
partners, including donors, where equal focus 
and resources are dedicated to high-impact, 
mature and foundational DPGs as for new, 
innovative DPGs. Creating transparency 
about the benefits of and the business case 
for sharing technology, can support advocacy 
for shared financing. 
Strengthen inclusive and meaningful 
participation in the design, development, 
and maintenance of DPGs.  As everyone is 
affected by digital technologies, everyone 
should have ways to contribute to the digital 
commons. Open-source communities 
traditionally struggle with inclusive 
participation across age, disciplines, genders, 
disabilities, but also across different income 
contexts. The GDC should put forward 
mechanisms for strengthening participation 
from low/middle- income countries in the 
digital commons.  
15UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
UNICEF: Towards a child-centred digital 
equality framework 
UNCTAD: Technology and Innovation 
Report 2021 
The MIT Tech Reader: Tech Companies Are 
Profiling Us From Before Birth 
UN CRC General Comment 25 on 
children’s rights in relation to the digital 
environment 
Responsible Innovation in Technology for 
Children 
Children’s Rights and Digital Technologies 
State of the Digital Public Goods 
Ecosystem 2022  
Principles for Digital Development 
UNESCO and UNICEF: Gateways to Public 
Digital Learning 
UNICEF: Pulse Check on Digital Learning Create a broad, multi-stakeholder alliance 
for empowering and engaging future 
generations in building the digital 
commons ecosystem, including DPGs 
and DPI.  
Young people's engagement in the 
DPG and DPI ecosystem will ensure its 
intergenerational solidarity and equity. 
Facilitated by the UN, and championed by 
Member States, the alliance will create 
actionable frameworks for engaging future 
generations in designing, consulting, and 
decision-making processes related to 
building, maintaining, and owning DPGs and 
DPI, to advance digital trust, local capacity 
and dialogue.  
Create and strengthen standards as the 
basis for an interoperable DPG ecosystem 
(standards-first approach). A strong DPG 
for DPI ecosystem requires a standards-first 
approach, that supports open-exchange 
formats and defines open specifications. 
Many sectoral efforts are underway (for 
example in health, child protection and social 
protection) that can be brought together in a 
comprehensive way. Accessibility standards 
are key for creating truly inclusive DPI.  
Strengthen multi-stakeholder 
collaboration on the digital commons.  The 
private sector needs to be engaged in a 
meaningful way in the identification of 
pathways for a more equitable digital future 
that recognises the value of open digital 
systems. Academia, on the other hand, has 
been proven an effective custodian of DPGs 
(for example for DHIS2 and MOSIP). The 
potential role of universities in inclusive 
governance of DPGs, including by young 
people, needs to be further explored and 
good practices need to be shared.  Sources of Knowledge
16UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023Adhere to privacy by design in the 
development of DPGs and DPI. Data of 
children generated or used by digital systems 
needs to be protected. Responsible data 
practices need to be a cornerstone of DPGs 
and DPI development and governance.  
Introduce a commons-approach to 
data governance to protect 
sovereignty and productive capacity 
by realizing data as a shared resource 
for inclusive benefits also for children. 
Data are a key driver of social 
and economic vitality, a 
source of economic and 
political power, and a crucial 
resource and essential 
infrastructure in the digital era 
– for knowledge-based 
decision-making, for building 
artificial intelligence products, 
for conducting research, etc. – 
with demonstrated potential to 
serve the public good, 
including the delivery of 
benefits to children.There has been a massive increase in 
data collection for and about children but 
today, access to data and the capacity to 
use and benefit from data are unevenly 
distributed within and across countries and 
across actors.
Choosing who can access and use data is 
a central societal question we must answer 
as our sovereignty as individuals and 
societies, our rights, our productive 
capacity, and (in)equities in opportunities 
and outcomes now and for future 
generations depend on how data is 
governed: collected, accumulated, shared, 
accessed, and used. We must develop 
sustainable data ecosystems that broaden 
access to data and their benefits. 
17UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 20237.© UNICEF/UN036675/Sharma
This can be achieved through management 
of data as a commons (within the context of 
the digital commons, see previous section 
on the Digital Commons), a way to resolve 
the data governance “trilemma”: balancing 
public interest, economic value, and 
fundamental rights.  
'Data commons’ are digital data that are 
collectively stewarded and governed by a 
community. Data commons are not data 
alone but refer to entire systems including 
institutions, standards, (technical) 
infrastructures, and decision structures that 
enable data access, sharing, and use in 
service of public value generation at 
community, national, regional, and global 
level. The idea of the data commons has 
attracted the attention of policymakers (as 
seen in the European Health Data Space 
proposal, for example) interested in 
developing institutional responses that can 
advance public interest goals.
By employing the idea of the commons, the 
debate on data access and use can be 
shifted beyond opposition and the stalemate 
between treating data as a commodity and 
de facto property for extraction of (largely 
private) benefits and protecting it as the 
object of fundamental rights (limiting 
opportunities to use data).
Moving towards data governance as a 
commons, we will have to differentiate, of 
course, between different types of data – 
personal data, non-personal data, health 
data, shipping industry data, public statistical 
data, data collected by online platforms – 
though there are recommendations that are 
sufficiently general to leave room for 
accommodating this diversity. Elevate the role of data as a crucial 
resource and essential infrastructure in 
the digital commons as a steppingstone 
towards concerted action to address 
digital inequities. Only 8% of DPGs 
registered with the DPGA are concerned 
with data. Global discussions on AI 
insufficiently highlight inequities due to (lack 
of) access to data and the centralization of 
productive capacity and power through data 
and, subsequently, AI in very few hands. 
Therefore, there is a need for significant time 
and resources to be dedicated to the 
discussion of data as a crucial resource and 
essential infrastructure at the Summit of the 
Future (and other relevant fora) including 
consultations with Member States and 
stakeholders leading up to it. 
Commit to developing and putting in 
place measures to address data 
asymmetries and inequities and, in the 
process, give serious consideration to a 
commons-approach to data governance 
as it promises to provide a path forward 
where progress pursuing alternative 
approaches  – strengthening of data property 
rights, expansion of data protection and 
privacy rights – has stalled. An interagency 
dialogue on a commons-approach to data 
governance should be facilitated through a 
dedicated Interagency and Expert Working 
Group – or by leveraging the HLCP 
international data governance working group 
or its successor – and to host consultations 
with Member States, civil society 
organizations, academia, and the private 
sector, a key partner given dominance in this 
space, to reinvigorate progress on this issue. Recommendations
18UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023
Exploring Data as and in Service of the 
Public Good 
Data Commons Primer: Democratizing the 
Information Society 
Public-interest Framework for B2G Data 
Sharing in the Data Act 
European Health Data Space  
European Data Act 
Best Practices for the Governance of 
Digital Public Goods 
Digital Colonialism: The 21st Century 
Scramble for Africa through the Extraction 
and Control of User Data and the Limitations 
of Data Protection LawsInvest in identifying where a global data 
commons may help realize global public 
goods and, subsequently
, to establish 
and resource such a commons. Global 
issues that are significantly hampered by 
lack of access to data needs to be identified 
to inform decisions or to develop solutions 
and to commit to putting in place a commons 
where needed, building on the UN’s role as 
steward of existing commons (the Oceans 
through the UN High Seas Treaty, satellite 
imagery data during emergencies through 
the International Charter on Space and 
Major Disasters) with UNICEF to (co)lead on 
data for climate, data for anticipatory and 
humanitarian action, and other areas core to 
the UNICEF mandate (WASH, nutrition, 
education, etc.). Consideration should be 
given to the role of data in climate change 
prevention and mitigation, an issue that 
transcends national and regional interests, 
and anticipatory and humanitarian action 
given the UN mandate. 
Develop guidance for Member States for 
putting in place data commons in service 
of regional, national, and community 
public good including mechanisms for 
meaningful community participation  
starting with the development of principles 
for such commons, their design and 
participation.  Sources of Knowledge
19UNICEF's Contribution to the Global Digital Compact Preparatory Process - 2023