 
 Contact: Christen Broecker, Deputy Director, JBI, broeckerc@ajc.org .   1/4 
Submission  by the Jacob Blaustein Institute for the Advancement of Human Rights  
on the Global Digital Compact  
 
February  11, 2023  
Procedural Comments: Ensuring Transparency and Facilitating Civil Society Engagement  
We are grateful to the co -facilitators, Ambassadors of Rwanda and Sweden, for having invited civil 
society organizations to share perspectives on the Global Digital Compa ct at an early stage of the  process  
of its elaboration . We offer the following further recommendations:  
• Future elaborations of the co -facilitators’ “roadmap” should make it clear that CSO consultations 
will be a regular feature of this process.  
• CSOs shoul d have opportunities to address each of the subjects of the “deep dives” convened in the 
coming months, and the subjects should be announced sufficiently in advance.  
• The texts that States will be considering during the negotiations stage  should be made pu blic to 
ensure that we are able to provide targeted, realistic, reactions to States in a timely way.  
Substantive Comments: Ensuring a Human Rights -Based Approach to Combating Online Harm  
At the initial consultation on the Global Digital Compact, several Member States expressed the view that 
the Global Digital Compact should address the negative human rights impacts of online expression , 
including those resulting from the spread and amplification of misinformation, disinformation, and hate 
speech. We offer the fo llowing recommendations on this point:  
Some online expression does indeed give rise to very real harm to rights holders, but so too do overbroad 
restrictions on online expression. If the Global Digital Compact addresses this subject, it must do so using 
a human rights -based approach  reflecting both of these concerns. This subject should be the subject of 
at least one of the “deep dives” that the co -facilitators plan to convene.  
In setting out parameters for this discussion, we hope the co -facilitators will  refer to two recent United 
Nations products that contain detailed recommendations on countering and addressing antisemitism and 
Holocaust and genocide denial and distortion online  using a human rights -based approa ch, and w hich were 
informed by stakeholder  consultations convened by the Jacob Blaustein Institute : (1) a follow -up Action 
Plan by the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion o r Belief , published in May 2022 and (2) a 
Policy Paper on Combating Holocaust and Genocide Denial by the Office of the Special Adviser to the UN 
Secretary -General on Prevention of Genocide , published in June 2022.  
The guidance  set out in the se documents addresses specific categories of harmful online expression – 
antisemitism and Holocaust and genocide denial and distortion  – but it is relevant to and can inform 
guidance on  combating other forms of identity -based hatred online  as well . The guidance is particularly 
valuable as both UN documents stress the need to ensure that regulatory initiatives undertaken for the 
purpose of addressing harmful online speech do not result in overbroad or illegitimate restriction of online 
expres sion, i.e., restriction of expression  for purposes other than protecting members of targeted groups 
from harm . 
Based on these documents, JBI recommends that t he Global Digital Compact : 
• Call on social media and technology companies to ensure that their algorithms do not promote or 
direct users to harmful content, including content that is antisemitic or denies or distorts the 
Holocaust or genocides or that glorifies perpetrators of these crimes .  
 
 Contact: Christen Broecker, Deputy Director, JBI, broeckerc@ajc.org .   2/4 
• Encourage social media and other technology companies to take affirmative efforts to prohibit 
harmful content, including antisemitic content and Holocaust and genocide denial and distortion, 
according to clearly art iculated, narrowly -defined policies and through varying forms of content 
moderation, including but not limited to content removal, with effective safeguards.   
• Affirm that States should  not prohibit  content,  and social media companies should not employ t heir 
content restrictions or other techniques for the purpose of prohibiting content, for illegitimate aims 
such as to protect the reputation of States or their  policies ; to protect religions and belief systems or 
religious or historical figures from criti cism  or ridicule;  or to chill legitimate historical inquiry, 
journalism, or efforts to memorialize atrocity crimes.  
Relevant recommendations from “Taking Action to Combat Antis emitism: Follow -up Action Plan for 
Advancing the Implementation of the Recommendations of the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of 
Religion or Belief in his 2019 Report to the UN General Assembly,” (A/74/358), published May 2022.1 
“6. Curb the spread of harmfu l antisemitic narratives online while appropriately safeguarding freedom 
of expression  
a. Social media companies should ensure that their community guidelines clearly convey that all 
forms of antisemitic content and Holocaust denial and distortion are not  permitted, and that these 
guidelines are transparent and easily accessible to users, and more broadly that they are taking 
effective action necessary to uphold human rights and protect targeted individuals and groups from 
physical or mental harm, in accor dance with international standards. They should consult with 
representatives of Jewish communities regarding the contents of their guidelines in order to 
understand what content is harmful in different contexts.  
b. Social  media and other internet technology companies should ensure that their algorithms do not 
promote antisemitic content or narratives or content that denies or distorts the Holocaust to users, 
without exception.  
c. Internet technology companies should not f acilitate public access to platforms, sites or applications 
that could or are being used to spread antisemitic content but are not undertaking to prohibit and 
take action to discourage its spread.  
d. Social media and other technology companies should trai n and sensitize all personnel, including 
content moderators, on recognizing antisemitism as well as how to identify and take action on 
antisemitic content while respecting freedom of expression.  
e. Social media and other technology companies should hire p ersonnel and sufficient, effective 
content moderators with appropriate language skills and the knowledge and cultural awareness 
necessary to receive and to act on reports from users about antisemitic content while respecting 
international human rights stan dards. They should design and review flagging algorithms to ensure 
that they recognize coded antisemitic language, and ensure the availability of accessible and easy -
to-use complaint procedures.  
 
1 UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief, Dr. Ahmed Shaheed, “Taking Action to Combat 
Antisemitism: Follow -up Action Plan for Advancing the Implementation of the Recommendations of the UN 
Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief i n his 2019 Report to the UN General Assembly (A/74/358), 
(May 2022), available at: https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -05/ActionPlanChanges -May2022.p df.  
 
 Contact: Christen Broecker, Deputy Director, JBI, broeckerc@ajc.org .   3/4 
f. Social media companies should ensure appropriate safeguar ds to allow for determinations about 
content reported as antisemitic to be appealed and promptly reviewed to ensure that freedom of 
opinion and expression, in line with international human rights standards, is upheld.  
g. Internet technology companies shou ld be transparent about the processes they have in place to 
identify, remove, or reduce antisemitic content and about the practical impact of such processes. 
Social media companies should regularly publish disaggregated information reflecting the volume 
of antisemitic content on their platforms; the volume of antisemitic content reported by users; the 
volume of content acted upon as a result of automatic review; the actions taken; and any outcomes 
of appeals.  
h. Governments should require social media comp anies to publish information about the operation of 
their algorithms and examine impact on the spread of hate speech and to reach agreements with 
researchers allowing for access to their algorithms on mutually acceptable terms. Governments 
should regularly  commission independent studies of the presence of antisemitic content on social 
media companies’ platforms and their response to users’ reports.  
i. Governments should ensure that efforts to regulate social media companies’ treatment of content 
that const itutes hate speech are clear, easy to understand, and are only undertaken for legitimate 
purposes such as the protection of targeted individuals and groups from harm and are otherwise in 
line with international standards on freedom of expression.  
Relevant  recommendations  from the UN policy paper on combating Holocaust and genocide denial ,2 
which  follows and complements UN General Assembly resolution 76/250  on Holocaust denial, adopted 
by consensus in January 2022 .3 
• Ensure that vulnerable v ictims and communities are protected from harm resulting from 
Holocaust and genocide denial and distortion online, including by limiting the presence and 
visibility of such content through narrowly -tailored, context -dependent restrictions .  
o Online content trivializing the Holocaust and genocides has significant potential to cause harm. 
It can cause revictimization, repeat historical patterns of discrimination and negative stereotypes, 
and incite hostility and violence. It can have significant influence on p opular culture, public 
opinion, and politics, and can lead to transnational impacts. Holocaust denial and distortion can 
also encourage audiences to ascribe to other conspiracy theories and to engage positively with 
other forms of disinformation, thus not only creating risks for Jewish individuals and 
communities and undermining collective historical memory, but also weakening the resilience 
and cohesion of democratic societies.  
 
2 “Combating Holocaust and Genocide Denial: Protecting Survivors, Preserving Memory, and Promoting 
Prevention,” available at https://www.un.org/en/genoci deprevention/documents/22 -
00041_OSAPG_PolicyPaper_Final.pdf . 
3 UNGA Resolution 76/250 “Urges Member States and social media companies to take active measures to combat 
antisemitism and Holocaust denial or distortion by means of information and communicatio ns technologies and to 
facilitate reporting of such content,” recognizing the “growing prevalence of Holocaust denial or distortion through 
the use of information and communications technologies” and its potential to violate and abuse human rights. At the 
same time, it recalls that “all measures taken” to restrict expression “must be in full compliance with international 
human rights law, in accordance with article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.” It 
further “not[es] the glob al and open nature of the Internet and the significant role of social media in spreading 
information, and their potential to play a positive role in the preservation of the memory of the Holocaust, promoting 
historically accurate Holocaust education and co untering Holocaust denial and distortion.”  
 
 Contact: Christen Broecker, Deputy Director, JBI, broeckerc@ajc.org .   4/4 
o Regional human rights mechanisms in Europe and Africa have affirmed that legal restrictions on 
Holocaust and genocide denial and distortion can serve legitimate purposes: to strengthen 
democratic societies by reinforcing a culture of victim -centered memory and compassion and to 
protect survivors of the Holocaust and genocides and the ir communities from incitement to 
antisemitic, racial, ethnic, religious hatred, discrimination, and violence.  
o Accordingly, social media and other technology companies should be encouraged to take 
affirmative efforts to mitigate the impact of Holocaust and  genocide denial and distortion 
through varying forms of content moderation, including but not limited to content removal. They 
should also ensure that their algorithms do not promote or direct users to content that constitutes 
denial or distortion of the Holocaust or genocide or glorification of perpetrators.  
• Discourage overbroad restrictions on online expression motivated by illegitimate purposes.  
o So-called “memory laws” that are broader than those prohibiting Holocaust and genocide denial, 
particularly laws that advance specific narratives denying national or communal complicity in 
atrocity crimes, including but not limited to the Holocaust, and protect those narratives from 
criticism or refutation, are not compatible with international stan dards governing freedom of 
expression because they limit the right to freedom of expression for the illegitimate purpose of 
protecting the reputation of a State.  
o States should abide by, and social media companies’ hate speech policies should conform to, 
international standards governing freedom of expression. They should ensure that restrictions on 
expression are not employed for illegitimate aims or used to punish and/or chill legitimate 
historical inquiry, journalism, or efforts to memorialize atrocity cr imes.  
• Encourage all stakeholders to capitalize on the power of digital technology to play a positive 
role in conveying accurate information about the Holocaust and genocides.  
o The UN -supported “Protect the Facts”  campaign against Holocaust distortion and initiatives by 
tech companies  direct users  searching for information ab out the Holocaust to accurate sources 
such as the “AboutHolocaust.org ” website are  notable  positive examples in this regard.   