 
 Global Digital Comp act: 
Consulta tion for the  
Americas  
Mexico City   
February  15-16, 2023  
   
 

 
 
Content  
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  1 
1. Welcoming Remarks. High -level intervention  ................................ ................................ .......................  5 
1.1 Martha Delgado, Undersecretary for  Multilateral Affairs and Human Rights of Mexico  ..............  5 
1.2 John Reyels, Head of the Cyber Department at the German Foreign Affairs Office  .....................  6 
1.3 Amandeep Singh Gill, United Nations Secretary -General's Envoy on Technology  ........................  7 
2. Universal Connectivity  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  9 
2.1 Open discussion. How can digital public goods move forward in the 2030 Agenda and its SDGs 
in the Americas?  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  9 
2.1.1  Yawri Carr, ITU Youth  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  9 
2.1.2  Ricardo Torres, Digital Public Goods Alliance  ................................ ................................ ........  9 
2.1.3  Questions and answer s ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  10 
2.2 Panel. Universal Connectivity  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 14 
2.2.1  Salma Jalife, representative of Centro México Digital  ................................ .........................  14 
2.2.2  Gustavo Siles, representative of Bolivian Private University  ................................ ...............  14 
2.2.3  Lizania Pérez, representative of Technical Telecommunications Regional Commission 
(COMTELCA)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  15 
2.2.4  Elon Parkinson, representative of Digicel Jamaica  ................................ ..............................  16 
2.3 Work session. Universal Connectivity  ................................ ................................ ..........................  17 
2.3.1  Discussion based on guiding questions  ................................ ................................ ...............  17 
2.3.2  Key takeaways from the u niversal connectivity workshop  ................................ ..................  20 
3. Digital Inclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 23 
3.1 Panel. Digital Inclusion 1. Equity in Access  ................................ ................................ ..................  23 
3.1.1  Matías Dodel, representative of the Cath olic University of Uruguay  ................................ .. 23 
3.1.2  Federica Tortorella, Internet Ambassador  ................................ ................................ ...........  23 
3.1.3  Denis Pocasangre, Secretary of State for Innovation of the Presidency of El Salvador  .......  24 
3.2 Work Session. Digital inclusion 1. Equity in access  ................................ ................................ ...... 24 
3.2.1  Discussion based on guiding questions  ................................ ................................ ...............  24 
3.2.2  Key takeaways from the work session Digital Inclusion 1. Equity in access  ........................  28 
3.3 Panel. Digital Inclusion 2. Empowerment and active participation in the digital transformation
 30 
3.3.1  Joana Varon, Coding Rights.  ................................ ................................ ................................  30 
3.3.2  Valeria Betancourt, Association for the Progress of Communications  ................................  30 
3.3.3  Alejandro Patiño, CEPAL  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 31 
3.3.4  Javier López Casarín, President of the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of 
the Mexican Chamber of Deputies  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 32 
3.3.5  Questions and answers to Javier López Casarín.  ................................ ................................ . 33 
3.4 Working session. Empowerment and active participation in the digital transformation  ...........  34 
 
 3.4.1  Discussion based on guiding questions  ................................ ................................ ...............  34 
3.4.2  Key takeaways from the workshop empowerment an d active participation in digital 
transformation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 38 
4. Open space on topics not addressed in the agenda  ................................ ................................ ...........  40 
5. Conclusion and perspectives towards the future  ................................ ................................ ................  41 
5.1 Amandeep Singh Gill, United Nations Secretary -General's Envoy on Technology.  .....................  41 
Annex. Universal Connectivity  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  42 
Equity in Access  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  45 
Empowerment and Participation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  48 
 
 
 
1 Introduction  
The present document gathers the results of the Americas Consultations of the Global Digital Pact, held in 
Mexico City on February 15th and 16th, 2023.  
The first section includes the welcoming remarks from representat ives of the convening institutions.  
The following sections collect the results of three thematic sessions held with members of civil society, 
governments and multilateral organizations, the private sector and academia in the Americas  on the 
following topics:  
Universal connectivity  
Digital inclusion 1. Equity in access  
Digital inclusion 2. Empowerment and active participation in the digital transformation  
In these, a synthesis of the panels with the participation of experts is first pr esented, and of the subsequent 
session of questions. Secondly, the contributions collected in the participatory discussion work groups based 
on guiding questions are presented. Thirdly, a summary of the conclusions of each thematic session is 
presented.  
Finally, the report contains a brief section of Conclusion and perspectives towards the future.  
 
 
 
 
 
1 Executive Summary: Main Recommendations and Findings of the Americas Consultation  
▪ Internet access, as a multidimensional factor, must be understood from a human rights 
perspective.  
o Some level and access to  connectivity must be guaranteed to all people.  
o Individuals and groups must have their right of access recognized and be  capable of self -
determination in the design, deployment, use and management of connectivity 
infrastructure.  
o Connectivity must remain a right and not an imposition. The option of not connecting 
(staying offline)  must be respected and digitization policies must always consider 
accessible analogue alternatives for access to essential services and the exercise of 
fundamental rights.  
▪ Connectivity conditions should be fostered through public, private, community initiatives or multi -
sector alliances, including co llective access alternatives, for example with the promotion of 
community centers for connectivity and community networks , or the use of public facilities. Such 
policies  must be adopted from a perspective of complementarity.  In this sense, it is necessary to:  
o Reform  political, normative , and regulatory environments to enable the  coexistence of 
different connectivity provision models, including community networks, and cooperatives 
for the provision of internet services.  
o Develop  complementary approaches for private, public and community solutions, based 
on public -private partnerships.  
o Implement complementary approaches and models  that surpass the idea of connectivity 
based on commercial terms,  fostering  connectivity through public, private, community 
initiatives, and multi -sector alliances , where it is not attractive from a market perspective . 
o Promote the creation and maintenance of free  and subsidized  community infrastructure 
networks derived from publi c-private alliances.  
o Governments should encourage public policies and regulations that are flexible to 
stimulate innovative business models, competition , and complementarity of formats to 
foster connectivity.  
▪ There is a need to d ismantle a logic of access to connectivity as an end in and of itself and avoid 
the reductionist imperative of connecting the unconnected; in this sense we must shift the focus 
on how to connect and what to connect for.  
o It is essential to generate political, financial, regulatory , and technical conditions to 
increase individual and collective autonomy for the entire population in terms of access.  
o It is necessary to generate mechanisms for an efficient use of universal service funds from 
programs with specific goals and with the objec tive of reducing  structural inequality gaps  
that affect communities in more vulnerable conditions.  
o Women  and girls , LGBTQIA+ people, rural  populations , Afro -American , and indigenous 
communities , among others, must be able to participate in the decision -mak ing process 
on digital inclusion programs and connectivity policies, as well as in monitoring their 
implementation.  
▪ The Global Digital Compact should generate practical guidelines for States to implement digital 
inclusion policies aligned with human rights  and sustainable development standards based on the 
establishment of mechanisms that facilitate the exchange of experiences and cooperation.  
 
 o The Global Digital Compact should focus on sharing best practices, definitions and 
concepts based on pre -existing c onstructions in specialized forums and other spaces for 
multilateral and multisectoral construction to encourage the creation of effective policies  
and avoid duplication.  
o The Global Digital Compact can make a fundamental contribution in recognizing the mai n 
structural factors that hinder the universalization of access to connectivity, such as 
coverage and costs.  
o The Global Digital Compact represents an important opportunity to advance agreements 
that allow countries at a structural disadvantage or without a ccess to fiber optics, to 
engage in infrastructure sharin g among other  countries in their region and facilitate access 
to connectivity infrastructure.  
o It is necessary to encourage the creation of agreements to share digital infrastructure 
between countries and establish  the corresponding  audit and control mechanisms.  
o The Global Digital Compact should contribute to creating measures, standards or 
indicators that can be taken as existing indicators and guides to promote agreements and 
conventions bet ween countries.  
o It is necessary to deepen our understanding of some of the main challenges  in the Digital 
Transformation, such as : (1) the potential contributions of large companies through market 
schemes , (2) collaborations between the public and private sectors and (3) technology as 
an innovati ve tool to increase connectivity.  
▪ It is necessary to take advantage of connectivity for the Disaster Risk Reduction  in the context of 
climate change, as well as prevention of fires and deforestation.  
▪ Digital  Access must be understood from a comprehensive perspective that considers the concept 
of meaningful  access.  This includes the following dimensions:  
o The development and use of digital  skills should be strengthened, focusing on overcoming 
gaps,  such as the accessibility for people with different abilities and speakers of different 
languages (multilingualism).  
o Digital a ccess should not be an isolated  policy issue. Instead, it needs to be closely related 
to educational, health, housing and sanitation policies,  and other rights enjoyed by all 
communities. It is necessary to address issues of digital education and the development of 
soft skills in all the actors involved, in order for them to be able to insert themselves and 
benefit from the digital transformatio n. 
o Efforts to address digital inclusion should be tailored to different target audience s (i.e., 
rural communities, people with different abilities, native communities, farmers , etc.) and 
must establish differentiated and clear objectives and strategies to guarantee digital 
inclusion considering their needs under a human rights protection approach.  
▪ It is necessary to adopt an intersectional gender perspective in the formulation of policies on 
access and connectivity.  
▪ In the formulation of policies on technol ogies and digital inclusion, it is essential  to guarantee the 
participation of each community from the ir own  perspective,  recognizing their needs from a 
systemic approach and considering their differences and particularities.  
o Equity access policies must be  built  on evidence -based diagnoses and determine shared 
responsibilities so that each sector can design complementary actions that integrate the 
criteria  of transparency and accountability.  
 
 o It is necessary to consider challenges and issues  at the subnation al level in order to 
integrate all actors  in achiev ing universal connectivity.  
▪ We must review the existing frameworks regarding exceptions and limitations for content 
protected by copyright to encourage the production of content at the local level, obtain greater 
plurality and diversity in the digital environment and move towards meaningful access.  
▪ Considerations on socio -environmental justice, climate change and energy transition must be part 
of the formulation of policies on connectivity and digita l inclusion seeking to promote responsible 
and sustainable initiatives.  
▪ The design and implementation of digital policies and strategies at the local, national, regional , 
and global level must incorporate human rights standards by design ; and establish for mal 
mechanisms for multisectoral participation, including at the monitoring, follow -up, and evaluation 
stages.  
▪ State digitization and digital transformation policies, as well as initiatives for the implementation 
of automated or semi -automated systems for the public function, must be widely discussed with 
society since  the design stage.  
o The diversity of social realities must be considered in the design of consultation 
mechanisms, including consultations focused on organized groups; online and offline 
consul tations, among other formats that seek to guarantee concrete actions to enhance 
the participation of groups that have historically been excluded from decision -making on 
technology decisions.  
o It is necessary to generate mechanisms to prevent and mitigate ri sks in the development 
and implementation of systems —especially from the public sector —, including prior 
analysis of the impact on human rights, prior to the adoption and deployment of 
digitization policies.  
▪ It is necessary to establish responsibility mec hanisms for technology companies in relation to 
potential abuses and violations of human rights , as well as potential adverse effects on the 
environment through  policies on transparency and accountability  
▪ Digital governance must be strengthened, establishi ng mechanisms for multi -stakeholder 
participation and coordination in the design and implementation of digital policies. It is also 
necessary to establish a structure at the national level that maintains leadership in the 
implementation of said policies, w ith the necessary resources and tools that allow  for the follow -
up and monitoring of the implementation of said policies.  
o The State must create coordination mechanisms  with experts in the field , and  international 
cooperation to generate technological soluti ons. It is necessary to generate value and train 
civil and public servants in the development soft skills and form multidisciplinary teams.  
o It is necessary to integrate digital identity and interoperability in the development of digital 
services needed by  rural communities, native population s, people with disabilities , and 
communities  in vulnerable conditions,  
▪ The United Nations System must establish mechanisms to support the implementation of the 
Global Digital Compact from the multis takeholder  perspecti ve of Internet governance. The model 
of the 2030 Agenda could serve as an inspiration to organize cooperation and coordination 
between UN agencies and commissions in  its preparation and implementation.  
▪ Sustainable and responsibl e digitization and mechanisms to account for the environmental impacts 
of technologies should be promoted, for example in relation to electronic waste.
 
 Day 1, Februrary 15 2023  
 
 
 

 
 
 
5 1. Welcoming Remarks . High -level intervention   
1.1 Martha Delgado, Undersecretary for  Multilateral Affairs and Human Rights of 
Mexico  
Mrs. Martha Delgado welcomed all the participants and expressed Mexico’s pride in hosting  one of 
the three regional consultations aimed at producing tangible recommendations to be included in the 
Global Digital Compact , which will be adopted at the Summit of the Future in 2024  
She stated that, as revealed by the COVID -19 pandemic, digital tech nologies have become essential 
for the achievement of fundamental rights, including the right to health, education, access to 
information and privacy, among many others, as well as for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda.  
However, they also represent new ri sks to address the deep inequality gaps, as well as to sustain 
sustainable development models around the world.  
She exemplified that, with half of the world's population disconnected, talking about sustainable 
development will only be valid if these people  have access to the digital tools that characterize the 
lives of the other half of the population.  
In this sense, Undersecretary Delgado affirmed that the Global Digital Comp act is an opportunity to 
outline among all of us the path we want to follow in the  use of these new technologies, as well as to 
redefine the social contract and revitalize international cooperation.  
It is a time to catalyze new opportunities and mitigate the challenges before us. For this reason, we 
believe that its core axis must be to achieve universal, meaningful , and accessible connectivity, which 
places the well -being of the human being at the center of all policies.  In that sense, she reiterated that 
Mexico  is deeply committed to participating in this global effort.  
She highlight ed that for a long time a model has prevailed that conceives science and technology as 
being asocial; and that technological progress is intrinsically good and that,  it thus  automatically 
promotes well -being and prosperity.  This approach needs to be correc ted. 
Given this scenario, Mexico considers it essential that technology and science maintain their link with 
the complex social system to which they belong and guarantee that they are at the service of humanity.  
She expressed that w e must understand this c hallenge as one that no country or government can 
effectively address alone.  
In this sense, Mexico considers that a Global Digital Compact must incorporate a variety of 
perspectives that jointly respond to the opportunities and challenges of the present.  Governments, 
technology companies, academic institutions, international organizations, as well as civil society from 
all regions, contexts and stages of development must be present in the conversation.  
In view of the foregoing, Ms. Delgado expressed that th ese Consultations for the Americas are crucial, 
as they bring together experts from a wide variety of sectors to participate in informed discussions 
that will lead to lasting partnerships.  
From Mexico's multilateral perspective, it is with this approach ba sed on collective conversations that 
we will achieve an open and free society, as well as a secure digital future for all people.  
 
 
 6 In conclusion, she reaffirmed that, for Mexico, digital inclusion is crucial for sustainable development 
and access to fundame ntal rights.  
She extended an invitation to work together to address the digital divide, so that all people have access 
to the necessary technologies that allow them to fully participate in society with dignity, both online 
and offline, and thus build a future that is inc lusive, equitable and sustainable and we forge a just 
digital transformation, leaving no one behind .  
1.2 John Reyels, Head  of the Cybe r Department at the German  Foreign Affairs Office  
For his part, Mr. John Reyels began his welcome speech by thanking the aut horities present and the 
government of Mexico for hosting the consultations for the Americas. He thanked the experts from 
the different countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, who met to prepare the consultations for 
the Global Digital Compact . He es pecially appreciated the presence of the United Nations Secretary -
General 's Envoy  on Technology, Amandeep Singh Gill, for his commitment during the regional 
consultation process.  
He noted that the consultations seek to create a space to design and collect the opinions of different 
sectors and digital experts from the Americas.  
On the Germ an side, he  highlighted two aspects:  
Firstly. Why is the digital compact  important?  
The speaker  mentioned that the Global Digital Compact  is a decisive opportunity for the international 
community to agree on principles for the appropriate use, development, and regulation of digital 
technologies. He also noted that the terms of use for these technologies have been established 
according to co mmercial, technological, and scientific interests. Reyels emphasized that the Global 
Digital Compact  currently represents an important pathway to align the interests of communities and 
nation -states around the world and to broaden the vision of digital tec hnologies as part of an 
international dialogue involving commercial actors and representatives from the fields of science and 
technology.  
He emphasized that the Global Digital Compact  will be a key document that will align the use of 
digital technologies i n the future, position ing human development and prosperity at the center. He 
reiterated that the Global Digital Compact  has the potential to become a central universal document 
as a reference for the sustainable and responsible use of digital technologies.  
Secondly . What does Germany hope to achieve through its support of these regional consultations?  
He answered  that the German government aims to mobilize as many interested actors as possible. He 
spoke on behalf of communities, interest groups, and regions, emphasizing that their hopes, 
expectations, and needs should be considered in the negotiations for the Global Digital Compact  to 
make it a meaningful document for all. He mentioned that the process of the Global Digital Compact  
will be negotiated by the co -facilitator countries Sweden and Rwanda, through their representatives, 
who he also welcomed.  
On the other hand, he e mphasized that since the Global Digital Compact  is a document negotiated 
between countries, it is very important to disseminate it as widely as possible and unite the voices of 
stakeholders to share their point of views. He also noted  the importance of doc umenting comments 
and agreements in a concrete way, summarizing the main points and conclusions, with the aim of 
 
 
 7 achieving a sustainable process through a report that compiles all the required information to be 
shared with the United Nations.  
As a represen tative of the German government, he has emphasized that they are particularly proud of 
what has been achieved through the consultations. This is because the approach with the host 
countries of the regional consultations (Mexico, Kenya, and India) has been leveraged to bring 
together the largest number of regional experts in one place and to bring the results of this 
multisectoral dialogue to the attention of the United Nations community through dedicated events 
that will take place in Geneva and New York in  2023.  
The importance of working together to train digital diplomats from around the world to successfully 
negotiate the pact was also highlighted, as well as exploring different implementation methods with 
stakeholders, which will be an essential part of the development and application of the pact.  
To conclude  his welcome speech, he mentioned the creation of a tool that will give continuity  to the 
exchange on the topics discussed in the consultat ions. This will be done through a digital platform  
that will be presented at the end of the Americas consultation and officially launched at the end of 
February. It was said that this platform was created by the GIZ team as part of their support in 
organizing th e regional consultations.  
1.3 Amandeep Singh Gill, United Nations Secretary -General's Envoy on Technology  
Mr. Amandeep Singh Gill began his welcome messages by thanking the Mexican government for 
their role in hosting the Americas consultation and the German government for their commitment to 
organizing the series of regional consultations. He also expressed  his gratitude to the representatives 
of Sweden and Rwanda, who serve as co -facilitators of the regional consultations. He was also seen 
appreciative of the experts who participated in the multisectoral dialogue, both as participants and as 
part of the imple mentation.  
As his first point , he emphasized that  from the perspective of the United Nations, the diversity of 
interested actors gathered  is very encouraging in the process of the Global Digital Compact . Likewise, 
he highlighted the importance of multilateral cooperation by the United Nations  as digital 
technologies are having an impact on the whole of society . Thus, it is crucial to have a universal forum 
to discuss these issues across different sectors and develop a shared vision of principles an d priorities  
in order  to take action for the future.  
The speaker addressed that historically,  society has progressed through different waves of 
technological revolution, leaving behind the governance of these technologies until a negative event 
sparks inte rest in creating better governance conditions to benefit society in a politically and 
economically sustainable manner. Therefore, society finds itself at the right moment within this latest 
technological wave to generate new opportunities for governance.  
Similarly,  it was argued that the paradigms of Information and Communication Technologies have 
been implemented since the 1970s and even when  they have brought about several  benefits to the 
world,  currently  new paradigms such as data application and artificial intelligence have emerged as 
key and central topics.  
As a second point, it was mentioned that the Global Digital Compact  process provides a space for all 
voices and topics, taking a comprehensive approach that is not limited to certain aspects. As an 
example, the speaker mentioned that within the  UN Secretary -General ’s Common Agenda report  and 
various speeches, there has been a wide diversity of topics  related to digitization and digital 
 
 
 8 technologies  such as the digital divide  and connectivity , but also a great deal referring to  data 
generation, human rights, fighting  discrimination, prevention  of internet fragmentation, among 
others.  
To conclude his intervention , Mr. Amandeep Singh Gill stressed  that while  the Global Digital 
Compact  process is currently in the consultation phase , where different ideas and points of view  will 
be heard,  comments can be shared through the website , which will be available until April  30th. 
Finally, the participants were encoura ged to remain active and engaged during the discussion in order 
to generate a unique opportunity for positive exchange and knowledge -building within the 
construction of the Global Digital Compact.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 2. Universal Co nnectivity   
2.1 Open discussion . How can digital public goods move forward in the 2030 Agenda 
and its SDGs in the Americas?   
The dialogue began with representatives from academia and civil society, addressing the following 
guiding points:  
• Understanding the implications for human rights of open -source goods.  
• The role of digital public goods in advancing digital social policy.  
• Financial models for the development and maintenance of digital public goods.  
• How can digital public goods  be leveraged to accelerate progress towards the SDGs in the 
Americas?  
2.1.1 Yawri Carr,  ITU Youth   
During her presentation, M s. Carr addressed digital public goods as a key driver for advancing the 
Sustainable Development Goal s. These refer to all types of technologies available to everyone, as and 
when required, with the particular  feature that they do not compete with each other. In the field of 
healthcare,  she indicated that open  code  applications  have  been  developed which h ave made 
significant contributions during the Covid -19 pandemic.  
In the field of education, it was noted that nowadays  various open data models can be utilized by 
those interested in learning new topics or sharing knowledge. Similar as for innovation, it is important 
to be able to count  on collaborative models where technologies are available at any time. It was then 
affirmed that such public digital goods contribute to transparency, the eradication of corruption, and 
the generation of democratic and inclusive governance models and systems.  
2.1.2 Ricardo Torres, Digital Public Goods Alliance   
Mr. Torres agreed that  a general unde rstanding of the meaning of digital public goods  is needed . He 
maintained  that the concept should go beyond software, data, and open -source code  as they have 
certain characteristics that contribute to achieving the SDGs. Standards , open content, applicatio ns, 
artificial intelligence models, among others  can also be considered as digital  public goods.  Regarding 
the creation of value of digital  public  goods, especially in developing countries, he mentioned the 
concrete example of Sri Lanka in the health sector.  
At the onset of the pandemic in 2020, Sri Lanka was able to create an application to monitor Covid -
19 cases within just two days after detectin g its first positive case in the country. Said application was 
implemented in hospitals, airports, and other public places through out the country. This case stood 
out for the speed  respo nse in face of the  crisis, but also for being created using the open -source 
software DHIS2, a digital public good and information system for the health sector used in over 73 
countries. Being a completely public application, it provided an opportunity for 38 other countries to 
take up the application and adapt their own vers ions.  
Additionally, t he speaker  reflected  that there are privacy, security, and interoperability implications 
for creating value in all sectors of society, but said that by being open technologies , they can help 
mitigate the risk of blocking or hacking of basic services such as healthcare. In fact, it  was pointed 
 
 
 10 out that critical digital infrastructure can be made more resilient to cyber -attacks by using digital 
public goods. The implementation of these types of digital solutions can be come essential, 
particularly in Latin American countries  aiming  to build a more inclusive and resilient digital 
infrastructure that benefits citizens, the public sector, and the private sector.  
2.1.3 Questions and answers   
• How to make use of digital public goods to regain “lost ground” during the pandemi c? 
Mr. Torres mentioned that the pandemic had two very important effects, first in the delay of 
digitization and the lag of the communities, but also increased the perception of need for how the 
digital infrastructure must b e a service for all.  
He mentioned that the real needs must be considered starting from the communities where they come 
from; therefore, governments and organizations must be the ones who develop the infrastructure from 
the internal perspectives of each cou ntry, taking into account the considerations adapted to the 
regional and global context.  
Miss Carr added that the pandemic was a possibility for the development and opening of data and 
public information for many countries, especially since in some countri es there were no laws 
applicable to access to public information. Such scenario became a call for decision makers, policy 
makers and other stakeholders to address not only the global emergency of the pandemic, but also 
other regional and global challenges.  
Comment  1: In the Americas region there is no clear conceptualization or definition of digital public 
goods, nor are there many related public policy instruments. It is due to determine the state of the art 
in the region, generate clear concepts, incentiv es, and impulses  for the creation of these  concepts . 
Mr. Torres mentioned that the Alliance  for Digital Public Goods is focused on enabling and finding 
projects developed in different countries, but an important step is that both leaders and local 
governments can focus and join the efforts that exist at the regional level.  
Comment  2: One of the main concerns is how to relate the issue of digital public goods to public 
infrastructure. In digital identity systems, technology is usually thought of  as the goal, representing  
the solution that is sought to be adapted to the existing problems. From a digital identity systems  
perspective, it is necessary to create public policies focused on human rights and on the results,  they 
seek to achieve with it. Consider ing that the goal is not limited  to implement ing technology , but aims 
to foster  communication and connection for society, and the open, secure and inclusive internet is the 
tool to achieve this, but not the objective.  
• How to stimulate the developme nt of digital public goods and encourage  the cooperation of 
the production  sector and the private sector to participate in these processes ? 
Ms. Carr mentioned that it is crucial  to have the consent of the communities in order to  adopt these 
types of techno logies or technological processes  and that d ifferent cultures and ways of life must be 
respected. Regarding the new sources of investment, she emphasized that the objective of digital 
public goods is to encourage  collaborative participation , not to impose them on society, respecting 
opinions while being equitable.  
Free software or digital public goods should serve to reduce the existing digital gap in the different 
countries of the region, for which it is necessary to have a catalog of existin g digital public goods that 
 
 
 11 are easy to understand, access, and download, not only by the authorities of the countries concerned 
but also by the production  and private sector.  
• How to integrate a human rights perspective from the outset in public goods, tak ing into 
consideration a gender and a culturally  appropriate perspective? How to ensure that States 
develop justice and accountability mechanisms from the outset?  
Mr. Torres mentioned that one of the main challenges in the identification of digital public  goods are 
the characteristics and principles with which they can be developed, especially considering the 
possibility that they may be implemented under schemes that are not beneficial to society. Therefore, 
a more detailed construction from a human right s perspective is missing, as well as identifying the 
components that should be integrated into standards and principles.  
Ms. Carr identified as a priority to determine what are the needs of the population and to which 
communities it refers; within the inte rnational perspective, it is imperative to recognize digital human 
rights within international spaces such as the Inter -American Court of Human Rights, since so far 
there are legal gaps in the currently existing arguments and jurisprudence . Also, she  empha sized Latin 
America’s clear  lag regarding the implementation of digital rights  when compared to other regions 
such as Europe.  
• What specific adjustments do you consider  necessary within the ecosystem of internet 
governance and global digital cooperation? Starting from  a perspective that considers and 
governs the Internet as a public good .  
Comment  1: The discussion on digital public goods can also lead, within the compliance of national 
legislation, to the  generation of barriers and disadvantages compared to goods created by the private 
sector. There are coordinates that can serve  as a guide for digital public goods to compete as a fraction 
of what is produced digitally in the private sector, such as scale,  identity management, barriers, cross -
border effects , and memory. When establishing a national perspective on the creation of digital public 
goods, considering the example of the Internet as a public good, it should be  taken into account not 
to hand over the management exclusively to the government, as this is generally what happens with 
public goods. Therefore, it is necessary to reestablish a strategy focused on digital public goods that 
includes public policies, as well as  cooperation w ith communities and compet ition with privatized 
goods . 
While revisiting the topic of internet as a public good and its governance, Ms. Carr mentioned that 
today there are new generations  who are interested in internet governance, but that at  the same time,  
many human rights or basic issues cannot be exercised without the internet. She commented that it is 
important to start questioning society's current conceptions of the needs of some communities. In 
addition, she reiterated that States should provide free  and good quality access to the Internet  so that 
communities can decide whether to use it or not.  
As an example of the results derived from the Covid -19 pandemic, she mentioned that currently there 
are digital native companies, but there are also companies  focused on other products that have faced 
difficulties in their transition to digitization , leading to other challenges within companies.  
She stressed that education and awareness about  the challenges and opportunities of new technologies 
should be key to governance, especially Internet governance. She also reiterated the importance of 
recommendations within consultations, as there is not always representation from large companies or 
local governments, which limits the influence of action.  
 
 
 12 • Returning to human rights and public goods, within the free software movement, many large 
technology companies have appropriated the logic of this concept. Beyond thinking about the 
implications of huma n rights and digital public goods, how to limit the debate from becoming 
a form of colonial expropriation of knowledge?  
Comment  1: The principles related to autonomy and technology development are key to think about 
the SDGs, but also for the digital futur e that we want to build. A human rights perspective must be 
included in the development of technologies, and beyond the technical vision s, technologies should 
consider principles of autonomy  and self-determination of people and affected communities; 
specif ically in the management of knowledge and data (privacy, security and interoperability), for the 
advancement of technologies. It is necessary to think about how to prevent appropriation and 
improper extraction of knowledge that benefit s the communities tha t are affected.  
Regarding governance, it is necessary to strengthen mechanisms for multisectoral participation in 
political discussions and implementation of policies of any kind  as well as  mechanisms for effective 
social participation of the affected communities. Likewise, it is crucial to reflect on what kind of 
technologies and policies are intended to be promote d, to reach a viable reality . 
Countries must develop public policies focused on guaranteeing the dignity of the person in the digital 
environment and unrestricted respect for human rights, not only as an abstract desire but with 
objectives and tangible facts that allow generating evidence that the design, development, and 
implementation of digital public goods are adapted to the needs of society and contributes to closing 
the existing digital divide in the countries of the region.  
Comment  2: The nations' cybersecurity strategies do not include a definition of digital public goods; 
at least 18 strategies in the region have no mention of this. Partly, this is due to the lack of definition 
of the concept. Here is an opportunity to advance a definition at the national level, which is easier 
when a strategy is developed with diffe rent interested stakeholders.  
There are two ways in which the region is pursuing the issue of digitalization and cybersecurity, there 
is a polarization between the two issues, as many countries choose to develop a digital agenda and 
some more develop digital strategies; both compete fo r the prioritization of public goods and 
resources, rather than being complementary. Ideally, both tools should define the term digital public 
goods and coordinate different common initiatives, from their own perspectives. Cybersecurity is 
important to add ress issues of human rights, inclusion, etc., if this is not considered, it will be difficult 
to talk about inclusiveness . 
• Access to digital public goods is important for inclusiveness, but is there any consideration 
for the establishment of cyber diplomac y, policies and/or laws? As many developing countries 
do not have this availability to protect certain sectors or people develop these solutions.  
Mr. Torres mentioned that there is a disadvantage especially for smaller and developing countries to 
implement  this type of digital solutions and that the focus should be on funds that can be gathered by 
multilateral companies to build this capacity within the countries. He mentioned the debate that 
currently exists about Chat GPT (artificial intelligence chatbot prototype), whether it is a public good 
or not, because of the controversy of definition that exists within the general consensus. The model 
is open, as anyone can use it, although it does not have the legal conditions to be modified by third 
parties.  
He added that this can be applied to other technological tools or social networks, where there is self -
determination of the technologies. Whereas other open platforms have adopted certain federated 
 
 
 13 models, where there is no single company or geographic locatio n where it is implemented, but it is 
distributed and jointly preserved by multiple people or stakeholders.  
Ms. Carr took up the issue of colonialism and added that it also happens within digital technologies, 
so it is essential that influential and/or econ omically powerful people, as well as vulnerable, 
traditionally marginalized or discriminated populations, are aware of the rights and risks that these 
technologies entail when using them. In relation to the question on ways to protect the developers of 
these open technologies, he mentioned that these people can introduce a different model of program 
development, work with models of responsible research and innovation, or include possible risks; he 
also mentioned that an evaluation and analysis of people's r eaction and interaction with the 
technologies will be necessary. Considering the involvement of experts in technological ethics to help 
cover the lack of laws in the development of new technologies for responsible development, he 
pointed out that it is not  easy to develop new technologies for responsible development.  
He highlighted that it is not easy to develop general concepts, but by including the technical concept 
with the incorporation of human rights and privacy issues, it will allow a better understa nding of the 
limitations and fundamental issues, so that people can better understand these concepts and apply 
them in a responsible manner and avoid them being used for practices with negative impacts on 
society . 
Comment  1: In relation to the definition of digital public goods, it is important to distinguish between 
the terminologies of public and common  as well as to distinguish commons and public goods, as this 
distinction defines what the governance of goods implies. Digital commons, like no n-digital 
commons, are threatened by a dismantling of life -sustaining possibilities and are inappropriate, yet 
there is a global trend to appropriate the commons and the life of communities; there are also public 
interest technologies and critical infrastr uctures that are also under threat. We are invited to reflect on 
the way in which discussions are framed, since human rights and public -private relations, which are 
considered a  threat to these goods, can be left aside .  
Comment  2: Regarding the distinctio n of digital goods, it usually implies that the government is the 
provider of public services, such as security, education, health, etc.; however, in the Latin American 
region, the public sector is not well known for its efficiency. Given the relevance of digital goods, the 
definition of public goods should imply the relevance of the role of government, albeit not the best 
way, especially because of the difference in terminology. The commons are considered a governance 
model, which can control access to inf rastructure or community networks as it is commonly referred 
to in the Americas region.  
There are digital assets created and managed by specific communities which may involve partnership 
with government, though government should not be the core actor with this responsibility. We know 
that government management is not the best or most efficient option, especially  since government 
terms change from time to time and the lack of follow -up falls on the management of the government 
in office.  
Another element of t he digital ecosystem to be explored in the digital public domains, are the 
communities that build community networks connected through their own infrastructure, including 
the management and expansion of the connection, do not need the patronage of the gove rnment or 
the private sector and do not compete with each other; but complement the limits of their approaches, 
which is known as market areas of numbers, since the market can fail and so can the government .  
 
 
 14 2.2 Panel. Universal Con nectivity   
The dialogue began with the intervention of civil society, academia, the public sector , and the private 
sector to share the different perspectives on universal connectivity based on  the sectors they represent . 
2.2.1 Salma Jalife, representative of Centro México Digi tal  
Ms. Jalife began her speech by remarking that the world is currently in a phase of digital revolution, 
which has marked different aspects of daily life, as well as economic interaction in terms of 
competitiveness, productivity,  and economic growth of countries. It has also marked the reduction of 
inequalities and the success in facing any crisis. She mentioned that universal connectivity is a very 
important factor and by understanding it as access to broadband and internet, either these 
terminologies  or the technology we should adopt might change in the future.  
She considered that universal connectivity is the basis for introducing society in all these aspects, but 
we must know the details of the gaps that prevent universal connectivity. She pointed ou t that most 
countries do not measure these gaps because they ignore how to do it and where they want to go. She 
used as an example the State Digital Development Index, the aim of which is to turn it into a regional 
initiative to gradually test it, to know the gaps that exist and to understand why there is no connectivity 
in all the identified gaps. She added that there is a close relationship between digital development and 
universal connectivity with phenomena such as social backwardness and per capita inc ome. From a 
human rights point of view, she stressed the need to empower individuals and communities to decide 
whether or not to connect and utilize these technologies . 
She mentioned  three findings about the index : 
• Affordability: connectivity in urban area s without the possibility of paying for continuous 
(monthly) service, and the affordability gap for the devices used that allow access to all 
Internet tools.  
• Reach of technology service providers: there is a gap towards rural and semi -urban areas 
where the re is no affordability. This service is covered by small operators; in Mexico there is 
a concession of social or community coverage, these seek to be simplified and can be 
considered as an alternative to reduce the universal connectivity gap.  
• MSMEs: in the region, unlike the successful coverage percentages, in the case of MSMEs for 
the digital use of companies, only 20% are using digital technologies; because they do not 
have the ability to easily access digitization schemes and enhance their economic 
development.  
2.2.2 Gustavo Siles, representative of Bolivian Private University   
From the academic and technical perspective, Mr. Siles commented that there are wireless solutions 
such as the 5G network, that although it is starting in Latin America within rural areas, the question 
arises whether it will really bring the same effect as in the northern hemisphere (in rural areas). 
Nevertheless, he highlighted the importance of reflecting on the promotion of affordable and 
accessible digital connectivity throu gh "bottom -up" strategies with the support of different sectors as 
the best way to bring connectivity to new users in underserved areas, and to propose solutions based 
on their requirements/needs.  
He stressed the importance of empowering users to make conn ectivity affordable and with the 
cooperation of multiple parties to reduce costs. In terms of business models, he mentioned that 
 
 
 15 currently within the technology entrepreneurship ecosystem, companies are not always focused on 
the rural environment. The new generations must be encouraged to reflect on the spaces for 
improvement through entrepreneurship, jointly developed with the communities and their 
requirements.  
From the regulatory field, he mentioned that governments have to open up to cooperation with ne w 
actors to provide connectivity to disadvantaged areas. Within the current model in most Latin 
American countries, they do not have cooperation with other actors and now community connectivity 
providers will be a fundamental part of closing the gaps.  
Finally, to close his speech, he mentioned the universal service funds, sharing as an example the case 
of Bolivia, where they concentrate on projects executed by a single company. Although the 
participation of large players is considered, there is no opportuni ty for bidding and it becomes a 
monopoly, coupled with a lack of accountability. He considered that funds should be distributed in a 
better way, integrating community operators.  
2.2.3 Lizania Pérez , representative  of Technical Telecommunications Regional Commiss ion 
(COMTELCA)   
Ms. Perez begun by reflecting on the hope that the entire world population will be connected, given 
that the pandemic has shown how digitalization and connectivity have helped the production  sectors 
to continue their operations by making us e of technologies. As a main concern, she pointed out the 
risks that exist online for all users that resulted from the lack of awareness of the risks and 
vulnerabilities when making use of the cyberspace.  
She agreed that there are multiple barriers for connectivity, affordability  being  one of the main ones. 
She noted that the cost to the operator and the price to the end user are generally considered, however, 
consideration should be given to ways in which it can be made cheaper for both the operator and  the 
end user.  
She proposed that having traffic exchange points in the countries could be a way for operators to 
exchange traffic locally without having to make use of international connectivity, which translates 
into lower costs for the operator and a low er internet price.  
Furthermore, she highlighted the tax burden that telecommunication services signify, using as an 
example the case of the Dominican Republic. Specifically, that taxes applied to telecommunication 
services, with 2% going to contribute to t he development of these services, but there is also a 10% 
tax on consumption. Although she pointed out that this tax is applied to luxury goods, different 
international forums have acknowledged that the Internet is not a luxury good, but rather a basic 
service that should thus be more accessible for the development of the sector.  
As a consequence, she agreed on the need to create measurements and analysis within each country 
to decide how to generate alliances with the actors that determine the application of taxes in order to 
generate a fiscal scheme where telecommunications are not affected.  
On one hand, in terms of accessibility, she reiterated the importance of promoting the deployment of 
infrastructure, especially as it is not profitable for operators t o deploy infrastructure in remote 
communities due to the low existing demand. Nonetheless, she commented that there is not much 
knowledge and analysis on remote communities and their social, demographic, and other needs. On 
 
 
 16 the other hand, regarding digita l literacy rates, she pointed out that currently the focus should be on 
the productive use of technologies as the first general objective . 
Lastly, with respect to the device barrier, she stressed the importance of the homologation of import 
schemes that al low the entry of low -cost devices to cover the needs of rural areas. As an integral 
strategy, regulatory bodies must be considered, along with customs requirements, import permits and 
homologation. She proposed that the regulatory model should promote not barriers, but openness. As 
an example, she cited the successful case of the regulatory sandbox in Colombia, which aims to enable 
suppliers to test technologies, exempting them from regulatory compliance for a certain period of 
time. If it proves to be func tional, it can be implemented directly influencing the supply and demand 
of services . 
2.2.4 Elon Parkinson , representative of Digicel Jamaica   
Mr. Parkinson mentioned that from a private sector perspective, an understanding between the 
different actors is sought within three main interests : 
• Accessibility of technologies, going through the revolutions up to the current implementation 
of 5G. The goal is to ensure universal  access so that people can use the service as a social and 
economic good.  
• Affordability through deals between parties interested in the acquisition of technology and 
its deployment . 
• Availability, as affected by access and entry  barriers.  
For reflection, he posed the question: what are the real barriers? He shared that currently, more than 
62% of internet traffic in the Caribbean is done on behalf of large technology companies such as 
Facebook, Google, Apple, among others; a large amount of  money is paid to carry their internet traffic 
in order to constantly improve network capabilities to carry the traffic that large companies want to 
establish within the countries.  
He explained that in the last five years, Digicel has invested more than $442 million USD  to improve 
broadband capabilities in terms of LTE and firewall in the Caribbean.  When large companies use 
approximately 62% of the capacity, it translates into more than $230 million USD  invested for the 
purpose of carrying their internet tr affic. The audience was reminded that these large technology 
companies do not pay taxes in the countries in which they operate and are hardly subject to 
compliance with the laws in such countries, in addition to the fact that they do not generate 
investmen t. 
He highlighted that when one has digital services established in another country and selling content 
to the countries receiving this technology, along with the pressure from consumers and businesses to 
increase bandwidth, technology providers must inves t in additional services. Compared to the 
services that customers pay for and the amount of investment by companies, it is not enough and 
constraints for acquisitions arise.  
He assured that there is a limit to what can be achieved with costs, especially be cause in the future 
large companies are going to generate new products and it will be the technology providers that will 
be under pressure to introduce and bring them closer to consumers, such as is the case with 5G 
technology. And when asked about how to get that return on investment, he shared that in 2015 the 
internet value chain was $3.3 trillion  USD , while in 2022 it was $7 trillion  USD . He mentioned that 
 
 
 17 over the last few years, technology companies have been in a structural decline in the returns the y get 
from the value chain with a 12% decline.  
Thereafter, as a reflection on the regulatory issue, he highlighted the issue of how to ensure that large 
companies pay their fair share of taxes. Legislators can establish limits on the amount of data and 
traffic with which they operate, to determine the percentage they have to pay either at the operational 
or capital expenditure level. This is done to ensure that local networks continue to advance as they 
are also affected by the high demand for bandwidth.  
Finally, he reiterated the importance of empowering regulators to understand what the challenges are 
and how to face them. To this end, all stakeholders must be included in the discussion so that 
connectivity becomes universal (government, private sector, ac ademia , and technology giants).  
2.3 Work session. Universal Connectivity  
2.3.1 Discussion  based on guiding questions   
• In what ways can we make  universal digital connectivity affordable and accessible for 
vulnerable communities , such as  hard-to-reach rural areas?  
• What business models can be fostered to create market conditions for investing in universal 
digital connectivity?  
• What can we do to promote favorable regulatory environments for smaller -scale Internet 
providers, alongside local and regional connecti vity assessments?  
 
Group  1 
Promote affordable 
and accessible  
connectivity for 
vulnerable 
communities  Business models  Regulatory 
environments  
 Other relevant 
aspects  
─ Qualified, productive, 
and participatory 
connectivity . 
─ GDC  should generate 
measures, standards, 
indicators, and 
guidelines . 
(20-30 ITU’S  Agenda ) 
─ Consider the Internet as 
a digital public good. A 
minimum level of 
universal connectivity 
should be provided 
without creating first 
and second -class users . 
─ Autonomy of 
connected individuals . ─ Generate a favorable 
context for businesses 
from rural communities.  
─ Affordable and 
accessible connectivity .  
─ Offer services that 
reduce service costs and 
guarantee the neutrality 
and impartiality of the 
network . 
─ Pricing -focused 
standards . 
─ Universal access funds 
with citizen ov ersight or 
audit .  
─ Conditional transfer 
programs . ─ Protection of small 
business Internet 
Service Providers 
(ISPs).  
─ Open data and metrics 
for competitiveness.  
─ Regulatory changes. 
Regulatory innovation 
and virtual education.  
─ Policies that prioritize 
the promotion and 
adoption of open 
technologies.  
─ Regulatory innovation 
in order to promote 
connectivity.  
─ Regulatory sandbox: 
testing technology to 
see if it works before ─ Agreements 
amongst  countries 
and provinces to 
share digital 
infrastructure.  
─ GDC would play 
an important role 
in promoting these 
agreements to 
share infrastructure 
between countries.  
─ Develop and 
operate a 
mechanism for 
monitoring 
agreements.  
─ Promote 
community 
networks.  
 
 
 18 ─ Traffic exchange 
points . 
─ Susceptibility on the 
company’s part . 
─ Standards of 
responsibility and 
ethics for free Wi -Fi. 
─ Free Wi -Fi access in 
public spaces  
─ Recognition of the 
coverage -based model, 
its costs,  and its 
limitations  
─ Enabling conditions : 
─  Supporting the 
realization of people's 
right to address their 
own connectivity needs 
=> self-determine how 
to design, deploy, use, 
and manage 
connectivity 
infrastructure.  
─ Facilitating multi -
stakeholder co -
responsibility : - 
State/Government - 
Companies - 
NGOs/Civil Society - 
Citizens  
─ GDC could request that 
countries clarify their 
commitments, develop 
a roadmap, and 
accountability 
measures  
─ Reuse of infrastructure  
─ Review solidarity fund 
mechanisms  ─ Leverage and ways to 
encourage private 
investment. State task . 
─ Promote that free 
infrastructure is 
subsidized . 
─ Encourage 
complementary models 
to the traditional one 
such as cooperatives and 
community  models  
─ Develop collaboration in 
digital companies with 
complementary models 
such as community 
initiatives and 
cooperatives .  
─ Generate political, 
financial, regulatory and 
technical conditions to 
increase individual and 
collective autonomy   
─ Incentives for 
communi ty networks  
─ Sustainable emerging 
technologies eg. satellite  
─ Circular economy in 
community  networks  
─ Public / private 
partnerships  
─ Community networks  
─ Cooperative models  launching it on the 
market.  
─ The State must ensure 
a minimum access as 
in the case of water. 
State as guarantor of 
access.  
─ Consider the 
recommendations of 
ITU-CITEL for the 
development of 
comm unity networks  
─ Reform the political, 
normative, regulatory 
environments so that 
they allow the  
coexistence  of 
different connectivity 
provision models, 
including community 
networks.  
─ Empower the last mile  
─ Better regulation of 
universal service 
funds  
─ Suitable  regulatory 
environment: 
flexibility and 
asymmetry (different 
rules for different 
contexts), updated 
indications => how to 
regulate, what type of 
connectivity?   
─ Shared and open 
infrastructure, 
(regulatory instrument 
available to the 
operator)  ─ Connectivity for 
citizen monitoring 
processes of 
environmental 
issues. Ex., a 
monitoring  and 
containment 
program in the 
Amazon with the 
participation of the 
8 Amazon 
countries.  
─ Early warning 
systems on the 
effects of climate 
change, such as 
droughts, 
hurri canes, frosts, 
storms, etc.  
─ Evaluation and 
attention to climate 
change issues.  
─ Area not served.  
─ Right to 
connection of 
people on the 
move in the region 
(migrants and 
refugees)  
─ Multi -stakeholder 
participation  
─ Spaces for 
dialogue with civil 
society, academia , 
government and 
the private sector  
─ Zero emissions: 
electronic waste. 
Opportunities and 
challenges of ICT 
Climate Change  
Key messages   
─ Connectivity for risk prevention.  
─ It is necessary to focus  that the  GDC can help identify factors that hinder connectivity . 
─ Need for flexible regulatory frameworks.  
 
 
 
 19 Group 2  
Promote affordable 
and accessible 
connectivity for 
vulnerable 
communities  Business models  Regulatory 
emnvironments  Other relevant 
aspects  
─ Important to foster  
multisectoral alliances, 
use of existing public 
facilities.  
─ Consider human rights, 
share best practices, 
space for multilateral 
discussion for effective 
policies.  
─ Need of d igital literacy  
starting from  better 
mapping of 
communit y’s needs.  
─ Minorities and 
vulnerable sectors must 
have the right to 
participate . 
─ Accessibility: use 
industry and state 
actions, promotion, and 
incentive.  ─ Greater wealth through 
business models with 
incentives.  
─ How digital humanis m 
is built, adaptability of 
the digital society.  
─ Encourage free 
competition hand in 
hand with the 
population.  
─ Competition and 
complementarity of 
formats to promote 
connectivity.  
─ The State should assume 
an integrating role, with 
a modular approach.  
─ The option of not 
connecting must be 
respected and 
digitization policies 
must always consider 
accessible analogue 
alternatives for access to 
essential services and for 
the exercise of 
fundamental rights . 
─ Address linguistic 
diversity to promote 
multicultura lism.  ─ Governments should 
encourage flexible 
public policies and 
regulations.  
─ State must be 
financed.  
─ Governments must 
establish innovative 
public policies and 
promote connectivity.  
─ Taking advantage of 
forums or 
consultations such as 
the GDC and other 
const ruction spaces to 
promote the creation 
of inclusive policies.  
─ Exchange and 
strengthening of 
regulatory 
frameworks that 
promote new business 
models . 
─  ─ Three great 
challenges:  
1. Financing  
2. Alliances  
3. Technology 
keeps  innovat ing 
in new and 
affordable 
products. 
─ 4. Deployment of 
technological 
infrastructure in 
rural areas.  
─ 5.Endowment of 
resources, given 
that public 
resources are 
scarce.  
─ 6. Manage loans 
from cooperating 
sources.  
─ 7. Have trained 
personnel for the 
deployment of 
connectivity in 
rural areas.  
Key messages  
─ Flexible regulatory policies to promote connectivity.  
─ Efficient  use of universal service funds.  
─ Broad participation in  program  design, monitoring , and supervision . 
 
  
 
 
 20 2.3.2 Key takeaways from the universal connectivity workshop  
Group  1 
• Dismantle a logic of access to connectivity as an end in itself and avoid the reductionist 
imperative of connecting the unconnected; it is necessary to create a focus on how to connect 
and what to connect for.  
• The Global Digital Compact  can make a fundamental contribution to recognizing the main 
factors that hinder the universalization of access to connectivity in the region, such as 
coverage and costs  
• The need to reform political, regulatory, and normative environments that allow for th e 
coexistence of different connectivity provisioning models, including community networks 
and internet service cooperatives, was raised.  
• Complementary approaches for private, public, and community solutions, based on public -
private partnerships . 
• The need t o reinforce the right of individuals and groups at both the individual and collective 
levels to address their own needs for access, connectivity, and self -determination in the 
design, deployment, use, and management of connectivity infrastructure . 
• It is es sential to create political, financial, regulatory, and technical conditions to increase 
individual and collective autonomy for the entire population.  
• Creation of flexible regulatory frameworks that enable the possibility of coexistence of 
different models . 
• Recognition of the tendency to assume connectivity as a human right.  
• Global Digital Compact  as an important opportunity to advance in agreements that allow 
countries at a structural disadvantage or without access to fiber optic s to enable infrastructure 
sharing among  countries in the region and facilitate access to connectivity infrastructure.  
• Internet as a digital public good with a guaranteed minimum of connectivity, without creating 
first and second level users.  
• Create measures, standards or indicators  that could be taken from existing indicators and 
guides to promote the agreements and conventions that the countries would assume.  
• As business models, the creation of community networks of free, subsidized infrastructures 
derived from public -private allia nces was proposed.  
• Create a regulatory sandbox and provide audit and oversight mechanisms.  
• Promote the creation of agreements to share digital infrastructure amongst  countries.  
• As “other aspects”, environmental impacts and climate change were addressed wit h zero 
emission targets.  
Group  2 
• Address connectivity and internet access from a human rights perspective.  
• Implement complementary approaches, beyond a connectivity idea based on commercial 
terms, integrating connectivity through public, private, community , and multisectoral 
partnership initiatives.  
• The importance of the Global Digital Compact  being able to base itself on processes and 
contents previously developed by expert organizations and multisectoral spaces.  
 
 
 21 • Efficient use of universal service funds, based on programs with specific goals and with the 
objective of reducing gaps between rural, urban, gender communiti es, and other gaps 
identified in the region.  
• Broad social participation in the elaboration of public policies, accompaniment, supervision , 
and monitoring of programs/policies.  
• Internet as a right and not as an imposition; respect the decision of the commun ities to connect 
or not  and consider alternative forms of participation in different  formats.  
• Flexible regulatory policies that can mobilize different formats and businesses, in order to 
promote connectivity.  
• Propose ways in which technology companies can contribute to universalization funds.  
• Different visions pointed to the need to reduce regulation and others more focused on 
increasing private subsidies.  
• Identify that large technology companies financially cooperate with universal service fu nds 
to bring connectivity to marginalized communities.  
• Integrate the internet as a right for all, in the digital age, the lack of access to information or 
non-digitized government services impacts human dignity.  
• Acknowledge access to digital services as a human right.  
• Identification of main challenges: (1) how large companies can contribute to financing the 
market, (2) collaborations between the public and private sectors and (3) technology as an 
innovation tool to increase connectivity.  
• A connectivity syst em focused on the prevention of risks and disasters in the context of 
climate change. Including protection of connectivity infrastructure.  
• Improve connectivity for the prevention of deforestation in Amazonian countries, linked to 
climate change.  
• Public pol icies must have objectives, indicators, and annual goals to close gaps in universal 
connectivity and monitor compliance. They must be part of a State Policy or a National 
Agreement so that when there are changes in governments, continuity in the process of  
closing digital gaps is guaranteed.  
Complementary  comments in the plenary session  
• The Global  Digital Comp act represents an opportunity to build upon what has already been 
accomplished and not allow  any setbacks.  
• Recommendation to use the resolutions and recommendations of CITEL as a reference for 
community network initiatives and to recognize the role that alternative models play in 
providing connectivity.  
• Regarding  monitoring mechanisms, there have been discussions about establishing 
mech anisms to track the agreements reached in the context of the  debate, considering that the 
final debate will take place between governments and civil society will not have access to 
monitoring the final text. Therefore, transparency mechanisms should be cre ated for the 
development of the text that will ultimately be approved by the Member States of the United 
Nations.  
• Universal coverage funds are small amounts of money distributed through politicized 
mechanisms. Most  funds are distributed according to decis ions made by a committee on 
contributions obtained from taxes, which are mandatory for telecommunications operators  
 
 
 22 and who are in turn paid to establish networks in areas without coverage. Expectations are 
very high, compared to the 1% coverage of a count ry. If a global fund is being considered, it 
is essential  to consider how it will be converted into investments within each country and 
what the decision -making mechanisms will be since it is a government mechanism that needs 
to be converted into a multi-stakeholder  one. 
• While the Global Digital Comp act is a multilateral framework, there should be a motivating 
factor for governments to establish a multi -stakeholder model in each country. Although the 
compact is signed by government representatives, there sh ould also be an invitation to build 
multi -sectoral groups or an entity where issues are discussed with the participation of civil 
society, academia, the private sector, technical community, and government, including the 
large technology companies that curr ently dominate the digital world. This will make it 
possible to monitor the agreements of the pact in each country.  
• The best approach is to generate social participation, ideally from different interested parties, 
to identify the best ways to use universal  funds to subsidize it. There are also innovative ways, 
such as how the economy ministries have programs for innovative startups and financing for 
rural areas to create new businesses, but do not consider micro -telecommunications 
operators, which can be co nsidered absurd, because it is very easy to implement. 
Governments can easily do this because they have the resources to do so, it is about making 
good use of what is already available, as there is a lot of money allocated for this.  
• The importance of build ing upon previous progress is exemplified by the Digital Agenda for 
Latin America  and the Caribb ean, which originated as a process to articulate the region's 
positions towards the World Summit on the Information Society. This initiative was 
subsequently continued through an intergovernmental meeting to discuss digital policy 
priorities, providing a solid  foundation for regional consultations on the Global Digital 
Comp act. A key issue in achieving universal access to digital services is the capacity for 
leadership and political decision -making, as much of the necessary reorganization is closely 
tied to the  actions of governments.  
 
 
 
 
23 3. Digital Inclusion   
3.1 Panel. Digital Inclusion  1. Equity in Access  
The dialogue began with the presentation of representatives of academia, civil society and the public 
sector . 
3.1.1 Matías Dodel , representative of the Catholic University of Urugua y 
Mr. Dodel began his intervention with a visual explanation using three graphs to understand the 
inequalities in digital access better. The first graph reflects the 1962 theory called "Theory of diffusion  
of innovations," which reflects how technological innovations are adopted in society with an "S" 
shape. In the beginning, a small number of people (the "early adopters") adopt the technology (about 
10%), continuing with the majority (40%), a late majority  (approximately 40%), and lastly, the 
laggards (another 10%). However, this way of understanding access growth has a significant bias: it 
assumes that everyone starts from the same starting point and has the same opportunities.  
Here on , the speaker mention ed the following graphs as two possible solutions. The first one is based 
on the theory of normalization, which suggests that technologies become cheaper over time and 
although they start from different contexts, they always reach the same benefits. The se cond graph 
reflects the theory of stratification, where one starts later in the adoption of technologies and thus 
inequalities increase due to the lag  it represents.  
He also spoke about how to conceive access and gave the example of considering it as a py ramid with 
different levels of inequality. From where we are born and from the more traditional socioeconomic 
class, material access is determined (devices and Internet), the next level could be considered skills 
and uses, and the last one is the internet "for what" or the purpose of use of the Internet (the tangible 
results). These levels of access are sequential and not dichotomous. Access is complex, and benefits 
accumulate, but negative factors, such as poor quality, can lead to less potential or divers ity in use. 
This, in turn, reduces the potential impacts of the Internet on people's lives.  
The last slide presented the Uruguayan case on the diffusion of access to computers and the Internet 
in homes. The graphs presented based on official Uruguayan data  allow us to observe the "S" shape 
of the innovation diffusion model. The charts follow the stratification pattern without state 
intervention (only through the market logic). However, public policies can change the trends toward 
normalization. Uruguay has the particularity of Plan Ceibal, a much more complex and sophisticated 
version of the 1 -to-1 model than "One laptop per child" (content was generated, and teachers were 
trained, among others). Plan Ceibal provided computers to boys and girls, which they t ook home. 
This caused a reduction in the gaps in access to devices (computers) between households with higher 
and lower incomes. Digital gaps of origin can be reduced; this can be achieved through public policies 
and the intervention of governments, and th e participation of other actors to change the inequalities 
of access  that stem from ones origin  through public policies and government intervention, as well as 
the participation of other  actors , to address inequalities in access.  
3.1.2 Federica Tortorella , Internet Ambassador   
Ms. Tortorella mentioned that when thinking about the resolution of any issue, it is considered that 
the government and its dependencies have the abilities and faculties to solve society's problems. 
However, it is also necessary to ref lect on the different approaches for citizen empowerment of 
 
 
 24 participation in different spaces. As an example, in the Dominican Republic there is a neighborhood 
council, if it had that voice and vote focus to create knowledge and recognize false news. Or, w ithin 
local governments, with participatory consultations, it is not about removing the governments ’ 
administrative responsibilities, as it is only to consider what is already available and see how it can 
be better used.  
She stressed that in order to talk about digital transformation, knowledge must be created,  and people 
must be empowered, to develop adequate mechanisms. Mentioned as examples : 
• The implementation in the Dominican Republic of the basic digital basket, a pilot plan where 
2,000 women for two y ears will receive an internet subsidy, a smart device, and training to 
generate digital skills.  
• From the civil society the use of experiences, similar to video games, are used to create 
learning. A game called "Social media vs humanity" was created , as t here is a lot of interest 
from people to continue learning about online moderation , which has allowed us to 
understand this alternative as a solution to understand the benefits and risks of browsing the 
Internet.  
Decisions and policies must  be adapted to the problems of society. Each country/region/ person  has 
needs, so the policy approach has to be different  and take into account diversity and what the global 
majority says.  
3.1.3 Denis Pocasangre, Secretary of State for Innovation of the Presidenc y of El Salvador   
Mr. Pocasangre discussed the case of El Salvador as an example of the implementation of public 
policies and decisions taken at the governmental level. In response to the implications of the Covid -
19 pandemic, digital inclusion policies we re implemented at the presidency level, making use of 
information and communication tools.  
The policies were mainly directed towards the education and health sectors.  
• From a human rights perspective, it is important to highlight the implementation of a di gital 
health system and the management of information to prevent diseases or risk patterns within 
a particular population . 
• In terms of education, he mentioned the delivery of tools that allow students to increase their 
access to educational platforms. Deli vering smart devices to each student to continue 
accessing virtual classes and distance learning from their homes.  
He concluded by emphasizing the importance of establishing programs that allow and ensure different 
types of rights, such as data privacy, cy bersecurity, among others, as well as ensuring every digital 
service promotes digital inclusion.  
 
3.2 Work Session . Digital inclusion  1. Equity in access  
3.2.1 Discussion based on guiding questions  
• How can we promote “equitable, meaningful, and safe access to the use, leadership, and 
design of digital technologies, services, and associated opportunities for everyone 
everywhere”?  
• What actions must be implemented to create true equity in the framework of digital 
transformation?  
 
 
 25 • What policies, frameworks and programs have proven to be most successful and should be 
scaled up and adapted to other contexts to foster digital inclusion?  
• What practical steps do we need to take to guarantee  digital skills and digital literacy for 
vulnerable groups?  
Group  1 
How to move 
forward ? Actions for equity  Policies, frameworks 
and program s Relevant steps  
─ Access to connectivity: 
multiple and beneficial 
technologies for 
people.  
─ Community use, 
community content, in 
the language of the 
region.  
─ Diagnosis of needs of 
target populations.  
─ Policies and strategies: 
create transversal 
digital agendas, 
including various 
issues that contemplate 
continuity between 
governments.  
─ Policies that address 
the vulnerable 
population.  
─ Entrepreneurship: so 
that the population of 
LAC countries, mostly 
consumers rather than 
creators of technology, 
transition to the 
creation of technology 
and content.  
─ Create a sector with 
specific governance 
that can create inter -
institutional programs.  
─ Recognition of the 
existence of structural 
inequiti es and multiple 
digital gaps  
─ Democratic deficit 
environments are not 
conducive to equitable, 
meaningful and secure 
access.  
─ Equity goes through 
the developing and ─ Address structural 
inequalities, gaps in the 
plural  form.  
─ Use of Technologies by 
providers of 
technological 
companies.  
─ Learn about the diversity 
of offers from digital 
training.  
─ Technologies based on 
principles in the realities 
of each in dividual and 
group.  
─ Information and training 
as a solution to the 
challenges  
─ Know uses and needs.  
─ Generate content that is 
located  and built 
alongside  communities   
─ Establish mechanisms 
that allow  the voices of 
historically marginalized 
groups to be heard a nd 
considered.  
─ To discuss and dialogue 
about digitization issues 
a common knowledge 
base is needed  
─ Promote more 
participation of women 
in all activities.  
─ Attention to disabilities, 
native populations and 
minorities.  
─ Digitization or digital 
transformation?  
─ Mechanisms for  other 
development models 
(outside the private 
sector).  ─ Creation of impact 
indicators to measure 
and monitor.  
─ Policies and 
strategies, based on 
good practices as 
experiences . 
─ General agenda that 
addresses particular 
agendas.  
─ Intersectional politics 
and digital literacy.  
─ Have a democratic 
framework, 
continuous policies 
and equity.  
─ Context based digital 
literacy: pe dagogies 
bottom -up, 
hyperlocal, 
“pedagogy of 
oppressed”  
─ Support youth from 
minority groups to 
develop digital skills, 
including “structural 
barriers” addressing  
─ Policies aimed at 
strengthening and the 
sustainability of 
community networks  
─  
─ Policies for the 
promotion of open 
technologies  
─ Promote local 
technological 
solutions – 
technological 
autonomy . 
─ Digital skills training: 
basic, advanced to 
create technologies . ─ Learn in practice.  
─ Create computing 
autonomy 
capabilities.  
─ Develop skills for 
technological uses.  
─ Digital services 
based on social 
needs.  
─ Reinforcement of 
the multi -
stakeholder 
participation 
model in the 
design of access 
policies, digital 
literacy programs, 
and content 
generation.  
─ Promote the 
generation of 
intersectional data 
on digital 
inequality  
─ Design human -
centered digital 
services  
─ Rationalize the 
fascination with 
new technologies 
(eg metaverses)  
─ Create  capacities 
to process and use 
information and 
data 
─ Access to 
information for 
knowledge 
creation  
─ Technology as 
cultural transfer  
 
 
 26 How to move 
forward ? Actions for equity  Policies, frameworks 
and program s Relevant steps  
promoti on of  digital 
culture.  
─ Invest  in the capacities 
to develop local 
technology (preferably  
open source).  
─ In addition to access , 
focus on training and 
training.  
─ Recognize inequality , 
intersectionality and 
diversity in  needs  
─ Address connectivity 
by layers  
─ Strengthening  
institutions  and the 
governance of digital 
policy  
─ Interinstitutional and 
intersectoral programs  ─ Bottom -up technology 
design.  
─ Productive use of ICTs  
─ Digital languages plan 
─ Public -private 
collaboration.  ─ Options on how it is 
included and non -
digital options for 
others.  
─ Create an ecosystem 
structure for 
innovation and 
entrepreneurship . 
─ Critical training on 
how the internet 
works: security, 
privacy, bad practices  
─ Plan CEIBAL  
─ Awareness programs  
─ Programs to address 
resistance to change.  
─ Digital agendas: 
transversal  
─ Long term planning.  
─ Creation of a 
governing 
body /organism  
Key messages  
─ Participation in preparing plans and programs related to digital issues is needed  to better understand 
multiple contexts and realities at the local level.  
─ Importance of advancing digital education policies from a critical perspective.  
─ We need to think about digital inclusion policies focused on reducing structural gaps.  
 
  
 
 
 27 Group  2 
How to move 
forward?  Actions for equity  Policies, frameworks 
and programs  Relevant steps  
─ Education stimulation 
policies.  
─ Available access 
conditions of devices.  
─ Creative industries: 
flexible economic 
policies for innovative 
business models.  
─ Consider the different 
realities in all 
countries.  
─ Use cases and 
construction for 
internet users and non -
users.  
─ Equal  floor for all to 
guarantee equal 
conditions.  
─ Reflect on the 
administrative projects 
of certain governments.  
─ Global and open 
Internet.  ─ Country theme, by  
different realities.  
─ The gender gap was 
imperceptible at the 
national level but can be 
extended in some more 
developed States.  
─ There are gaps not yet 
identified.  
─ We forget people who 
are not connected to the 
internet.  
─ Identify potential users.  
─ Socioeconom ic rural 
gaps.  
─ Make visible the costs of 
digital literacy.  
─ Identify minorities.  
 ─ Break away from 
corruption.  
─ Work at the 
subnational level.  
─ Access is only 
meaningful if it is 
global and open.  
─ Creation of active 
participation 
mechanisms, with a 
cultural perspective.  
─ Inclusion policies, 
linked to policies and 
practical case studies 
to better understand 
how to achieve 
inclusion.  
─ Begin to decolonize 
our views of  
technologies in 
communit ies. 
─ Digital inclusion 
centers.  ─ Cybersecurity 
must be considered  
one of the pillars 
of digitization.  
─ Digital literacy.  
─ Identify gaps that 
dominate the 
digital scenario . 
─ Establish access 
points to get 
internet access   
Key messages  
─ Need to incorporate the human rights perspective into the formulation of policies related to connectivity 
and digitization.  
─ Generate legal conditions and integrate public policies to promote meaningful access . 
─ Address issues of corruption and impunity.   
 
  
 
 
 28 3.2.2 Key takeaways  from the work session  Digital Inc lusion 1 . Equity in access  
Group  1 
▪ To achieve equity with a view to digital inclusion, it is necessary to understand local needs 
and particularities. Therefore, adopting bottom -up models is a condition for p olicies on the 
matter to have an effect.  
▪ Digital inclusion is directly associated with strengthening individual and collective rights. 
The design, use, access, and development of technologies must be based on respect for 
human rights.  
▪ Promote incentives fo r the implementation of objectives and goals.  
▪ Encourage countries to raise their level through "rankings"; this provides credibility and 
increases reputation; they can be incorporated into the digital agendas of each country.  
▪ The need for diagnoses and pub lic policies is based on evidence and the participation of the 
communities and nations that make up the compact.  
▪ Determine shared responsibilities, and each sector can design complementary actions.  
▪ Development of abilities and capacities, the autonomy of the user to choose the tools that he 
wants to implement, that he can determine what type of technology and for what purpose.  
 
Group  2 
▪ There is no one recipe for everyone, but we need to focus on communities and people who 
are not connected and involve them in discussions.  
▪ Access should not be isolated but associated with educational policies. Topics of digital 
education and soft skills to be able to be inserted in the digital transformation.  
▪ The intersectionality approach should be  integrated into the discussions.  
▪ It is necessary to review the exceptions and limitations for content protected by copyright.  
▪ Transparency and accountability on the part of technology platforms and companies are 
essential to determine the scope of artific ial intelligence initiatives and their impact on 
society.  
▪ Energy transition in non -interconnected areas.  
▪ Connect the issue of digital inclusion with the energy transition to identify mechanisms and 
ways to use digital technologies to mitigate the environme ntal crisis.  
▪ Corruption and impunity must be addressed at all levels, and digital technologies should be 
promoted to instill a culture of transparency and accountability in the governmental and 
non-governmental sectors.  
▪ Equal access implies recognizing tha t the other has the same rights and must be treated with 
respect; they must also participate in the design of public policies, regulations, or 
technological solutions, which must be focused on satisfying their needs or solving the 
general problems affect t hem.  
 
 
 Day 2, February 16  2023  
 
 
 

 
 
 30 3.3  Panel. Digital Inclusion  2. Empowerment and active participation in the digital 
transformation   
The dialogue began with the presentation of academia, civil society, and public sector  representatives.  
3.3.1 Joana Var on, Coding Rights . 
Ms. Varon emphasized that f rom the perspective of feminist theories in practice, as a political analysis 
of the imbalance of power in the development and use of technologies, alternative futures are 
envisioned based on past and prior knowledge.  
She considered that in order to speak about empowerment and inclusion it is relevant to ask, who 
holds the power? She mentioned that previously, when the interested parties  started to debate about 
digital policies, connectivity was the primary topic on the agenda. Now the context has changed and 
there is talk of, for example, layered models of monopoly data. And as digitalization advances in all 
aspects of society, political  power is higher in some states, with that also the power to influence human 
behavior and mental health.  
She proposed as an example that in Brazil, monopolies are gaining from threats to democracies with 
hate speeches, gender violence, social discriminatio n, among others. These actions are generating 
profits for these companies, as well as the information of electoral processes, everything is monetized 
by algorithms and prioritizes the engagement of these issues that are biased towards communities 
such as L GBT and other vulnerable communities . 
Technologies have materiality and unfold in the map of "Cartographies of the Internet", there is key 
material for technological infrastructure, starting from countries of the global south, with severe social 
and enviro nmental impacts. Derived from the different stratification patterns on the map, recurring 
colonial relations can be seen, therefore, it is necessary to transform the current notion of digital 
transformation by  changing the relations between countries and s ituating the global power 
asymmetries and geopolitics behind the technology, as well as the materiality.  
She emphasized that the debate should be led with key issues to be the focus of other international 
forums on the digital side to break the monopolies of large technologies, address gender -based 
violence, the regulation of platforms, limit and prohibit surveillance tools, social and environmental 
impacts of technological developments, among others.  
Finally, within the progressive agenda, she mentioned th at structural inequalities must be recognized 
in different mechanisms with the support of investment in education, research, infrastructure and 
consider affirmative actions both nationally and considering the consequences of colonization and 
how they conti nue to guide relations in geopolitics.  
3.3.2 Valeria Betancourt, Association for the Progress of  Communications1  
At the beginning of her remarks , Ms. Betancourt mentioned that from the presentation of the report 
of Our Common Agenda by the Secretary General of the United Nations in 2021, the development of 
the Global Digital Comp act is proposed to be agreed upon at the Summit of the Future in 2024 . Based 
on this, she mentioned that civil society organizations in Latin America that work in the field of digital 
 
1 The Coding Rights and APC intervention can be viewed in full at: https://www.apc.org/en/pubs/apc -and-
coding -rights -intervention -gdc-americas -multistakeholder -consultation/.  
 
 
 31 technologies, human rights, and development, began a process of facilitation and exchange to 
exchange points of view and collect inputs and contri butions to the Global Digital Comp act. 
As part of these processes, she mentioned that the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Governance 
Forum (LACIGF) focused its conversations and discussions on thematic axes, also from the 
perspective of identifying p riorities in the region for the compact process. She showed interest in 
sharing the views and discussions that have arisen with different actors on digital inclusion, and she 
highlighted that many of the interests are established by specific groups. This d esign has an impact 
on society, especially those that have been subjected to structural conditions of inequality or some 
discrimination and violence.  
She considered it essential that multisectoral social participation processes complement multilateral 
dyna mics so that people can access and enjoy a free and open internet to exercise their autonomy and 
build collective power and organizational capacity within uneven power relations due to structural 
factors.  
Participation and empowerment in the digital enviro nment cannot be addressed without considering 
cybersecurity from a rights perspective. The absence of balancing mechanisms that facilitate access 
to culture and knowledge, generated by the predominant intellectual property paradigm, hinders the 
production of relevant content focused on people's needs.  
Finally, she emphasized the increase in technology -based gender violence as an obstacle to digital 
participation and inclusion. The gender -based  violence that structurally crosses Latin American 
societies has moved from physical spaces to digital spaces and has been magnified, deepening the 
gender gap in technologies.  
To safeguard rights and build a free, open, and secure environment in a digital future, the idea of the 
internet as a common good must be priorit ized, together with the idea that individual and collective 
rights are essential to advance the development of a dignified life.  
3.3.3 Alejandro Patiño, CEPAL   
Mr. Patiño began by pointing out that within policy design, both the governance framework and the 
institutional framework relate to enable channels of empowerment and active participation in the 
digital transformation. As a starting point, he argued that the national digital agendas have been 
considered as an instrument for advancing the policy. According to the last review of 20 Latin 
American countries, 15 countries have implemented national agendas, while there are leading 
countries in digital policy such as Uruguay.  
He emphasized to retake the dissemination of these instruments in terms of content as th ey are always 
linked to infrastructure issues and digital government. Likewise, he added that the strategic objectives 
must continue to work on productive development. An important part are the digital tools in 
companies, for innovation and entrepreneurshi p. 
As challenges, he highlighted the following:  
• Institutional governance models can be translated in practical terms or in the empowerment 
of active participation, they have to do with how national and local digital agendas are 
designed.  
• It is extremely important what lies behind this instrument, as an institutional and governance 
framework with institutions with important hierarchy linked to these digital issues.  
 
 
 32 • Not all countries have coordination committees, it is important to articulate poli cies in 
different sectors.  
• The construction of the policy must have participatory spaces in the design, renewal and 
updating of the policy as part of the institutional design.  
Finally, he brought his intervention to a close by emphasizing the issue of reso urces, since the budget 
allocated by governments to these policies is very small or almost nil. The institutional design is 
important to give practicality to empowerment and active participation in the digital transformation.  
3.3.4 Javier López Casarín,  Presiden t of the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission 
of the Mexican Chamber of Deputies  
According to Mr. Lopez Casar ín, innovation is the engine of economies . Likewise, science, 
technology , and innovation are the route under which the different challenge s that each country faces 
must be addressed . He considers that these elements are also the key to reduc ing the inequality gaps 
in society; he assured that there is no bad technology, it depends on its implementation which 
undoubtedly leads to different iated responsibilities:  
• Technology will help achieve the SDGs, as a route that has been agreed globally.  
• Internet connectivity  must be  considered as a human right; in Mexico it is considered as a 
constitutional right.  
• The impact sought in public policies, is not only to recognize  it as a right  but to ensure  the 
right to quality and content, as well as civility and ethics in the training of users.  
• We must c ollectively address the current dilemmas  in the digital sphere  such as free dom of  
expression and censorship of publications.  
• It is important to foster e ducation on digital tools and the use of the Internet.  
• Society must acquire co- respo nsibility in the use of internet or digital world.  
Moreover , he shared public policies implemented in Mexico , and mentioned that the power should 
emanate from society, since it is the users who set the trends. One of these policies is the "Internet for 
All" program, w hich aims to increas e connectivity to reduce the connectivity gap and provide 
tools/knowledge to generate economic growth. He also recalled that i t is also important to consider 
that not everyone wants to belong to the digital world.  
As part of the initiatives  adopted in the Mexican Chamber of Deputies, he mentioned making public 
policy on Internet access a priority, ethical accompaniment, as well as digital education that can be 
taught from early childhood  through public  education mod els. 
He also noted that to address one of the most relevant problems, namely cybersecurity, it is necessary 
to create  a solid legal framework, strengthening the rule of law and classifying  crimes in the digital 
world  which warrant a differentiated treatmen t under the Law than crimes committed  in the physical 
world.  
He mentioned the legal framework that Mexico is prioritizing within its rule of law , the following 
ongoing initiatives : 
• Federal Cybersecurity Law:  
• Cyber Defense Law  
• Digital Identity Law  
• Digital Economy Law  
 
 
 33 In his closing remarks,  he mentioned the importance of international collaboration to strengthen 
the existence of cybersecurity agencies and agencies aimed at other technology -related issues, in 
order to foster awareness among countries  of the co -responsibility  we must develop  within the 
region and within local ecosystems.  
3.3.5 Questions and answers  to Javier López Casarín.  
Comment  1: When talking about inclusion and if we are looking for equal access, one must start 
from the security measures that allow equal access.  Security measures must be taken from the origin, 
as citizens we have a social responsibility about the data we share. The adaptability of the digital 
society is what will allow it to be acquired.  
a. How to transmi t to the local congresses of the different countries of the Americas, in order 
to convert the initiatives into bills and to determine that a regulatory framework is produced?  
b. Regarding the institutional follow -up of the consultations, it would be intere sting to 
propose, through a multilateral representation such as ECLAC, an entity to follow up on the 
Global Digital Comp act from the Latin American perspective. Since there is no United 
Nations agency to act as an interlocutor . 
The deputy mentioned that th e model implemented by Mexico for the cybersecurity framework will 
be presented in April at the UN meeting in Vienna, to all sectors and the entire ecosystem, through 
forums and putting into perspective the vision of each one and knowing what their concern s are. One 
of the challenges is the issue of investment, so that companies and suppliers have social responsibility 
to invest in infrastructure.  
He added that constant parliaments are maintained, through parliamentary diplomacy with different 
countries for  the exchange and strengthening of practices, through what is going to be implemented. 
One thing missing is an area that can maintain a follow -up despite the fact that people change 
positions and that is maintained beyond the legislative periods.  
Comment  2: We are failing to address the concept of digital humanism;  the development of 
technology is more focused on the corporate and the interests of large technology companies. At 
present people are living a tyranny of the algorithm and a war for the attention  and influence of the 
big technologies. There is a dehumanization, an algorithm created by other cultures has been created, 
leaving aside the different cultures of the region. It is also worrying how women are involved from 
their interests and their purpos es can use science and technology, this is related to the educational 
approach of the future and how human beings are enabled from what they want.  
Mr. López Casarín reacted to the previous comment by mentioning that Mexico is analyzing a new 
Law on Science  and Technology, the proposal of the Federal Executive is the Law on Humanities, 
Science, Technology and Innovation, putting people at the forefront in order to prioritize the 
perception of the concept of humanism. It must emanate from a collective conscie nce and the 
formation of society. Similarly, it is essential to integrate inclusion issues such as youth, 
environmental issues, privacy, dissemination, among others.  
The deputy proposed that after the forum, the conclusions be presented in the Mexican Cham ber of 
Deputies to reach more sectors of society within the country . 
 
 
 34 3.4 Working session . Empowerment and active participation in the digital 
transformation   
3.4.1 Discussion based on guiding  questions   
• How can we empower communities to create and influence digital content and development 
that is relevant to their priorities and environment?  
• What practical policies and programs can be put in place to ensure that people in vulnerable 
conditions are involved in the design, development, testing and evaluation of  digital devices, 
services, policies , and programmes?  
• What elements should be included in the GDC to safeguard fundamental rights and freedoms 
online, as well as user data and privacy, and promote a free, open and secure digital 
environment?  
Questions sugg ested by the participants : 
• What opportunities does the GDC process and broader digital processes offer both to reaffirm 
the principle that human rights apply online as well as  offline and to contribute to the 
protection of human rights?  
• What specific prior ities and roles  for the UN system would you recommend in order to 
promote digital inclusion, limit the growing power of corporations and move towards a free, 
safe and open internet?  
• How can governments, the private sector and civil society ensure mechanisms for real social 
participation in the design, development and implementation of digital technologies and 
policies around these tools that are relevant to their priorities and environment ? 
 
  
 
 
 35 Group 1  
Empower 
communities  Practica l policies  and 
program s Element s on 
freedoms and rights  Other relevant 
aspects  
─ Evidence -based 
diagnosis.  
─ Approach of shared 
and differentiated 
responsibility between 
all economic and social 
sectors.  
─ Human rights audits 
that include impacts 
upon  communities.  
─ Consider the diversity 
of social realities in the 
co-design of 
consultation 
mechanisms and 
participatory processes.  
─ Inform the community 
about the possible risks 
of using technologies.  
─ Inform about  
cybersecurity in depth 
and raise critical 
awareness.  
─ Provide  
recommendations for 
both the private and 
public sectors, 
academia, and civil 
society, to identify 
functions.  
─ Training in the first 
levels of basic 
education.  
─ Prior consultation and 
participation  
mechanisms  
─ Strengthen supervision 
mechanisms of large 
technology companies.  
─ Internet / enable the 
exercise of law, build 
with communities from 
the bottom up  
─ Detonate content 
creator groups, 
regulations, and 
regulatory framework  
─ Work on capacity 
building a nd create a ─ Impact 
evaluation/monitoring to 
redesign policies.  
─ Sustainable , coordinated 
and integral  strategy.  
─ Inform citizens with 
total transparency about 
digital rights.  
─ Human rights language 
translated into 
compatible languages.  
─ Monitoring Big Tech in 
terms of human rights.  
─ Encourage a national 
digital d ialogue.  
─ The model of the 2030 
Agenda could serve as 
an inspiration to 
organize cooperation 
and coordination 
between UN agencies 
and commissions in the 
elaboration and 
implementation.  
─ Adequation of  
regulatory frameworks 
for the coexistence of 
different pro vision 
models  
─ Mandatory human rights 
assessments of software 
and hardware used by 
the State.  
─ Promote financial 
inclusion experiences  
─ National bodies for 
monitoring GDC 
commitments  
─ Financing incentives for 
compliance with GDC 
objectives and goals  
─ Education systems must 
train in citizenship and 
digital rights  
─ Policies and programs 
require governments 
disposition to national ─ Train the public sector 
in human rights. For 
the same sector and 
academy.  
─ Issues of regulation, 
efficiency and setting 
limits.  
─ Regulatory 
frameworks for 
coexistence in 
provision models.  
─ Net neutrality.  
─ Content preservation.  
─ Avoid discrimination 
against these.  
─ Strengthen research 
capacities and 
evidence production 
as a basis for defining 
public policies.  
─ Set a clear boundar y 
for the mechanisms.  
─ Hold multi -parties 
exercises  
─ Promote own research 
from within the 
communities and 
region  
─ Transparency and 
accountability of 
companies  
─ Integration of 
calendars  
─ To implement the 
lines of action of the 
GDC, suggest 
creating agreements  
and both national and 
local groups  
─ Use of open and 
interoperable 
standards  
─ Use of open and  
interoperable 
standards  
─ Exchange  of 
experiences for 
promoting the defense ─ Platforms that 
invade privacy.  
─ Sensitization of 
issues.  
 
 
 36 Empower 
communities  Practica l policies  and 
program s Element s on 
freedoms and rights  Other relevant 
aspects  
cybersecure 
environment  
─ Empower in critical use 
of the internet  
─ Participation 
mechanisms that 
consider:  data security 
and privacy  and 
mitigation of 
harassment  risks  of 
vulnerable groups   dialogue and political 
agreements  
─ Boost the digital 
economy in vulnerable 
communities through 
government incentives.  
─ Policy against planned 
obsolescence  
 of rights  between 
countries that have 
managed to  hold the 
private sector co -
responsible . For 
example,  
accountability of Big 
techs for abuses of 
platforms that invade 
privacy  
─ Sensiti zation of the 
issues.  
 
Key messages  
─ Need to establish responsibility mechanisms for technology companies about potential abuses and 
violations of human rights that consider elements of transparency and accountability.  
─ Need to generate means to prevent and mitigate risks in the development and implementation of  
systems - especially from the public sector - including a preliminary analysis of the impact on human 
rights and audits.  
─ Need to establish mechanisms for the participation of multiple stakeholders in decision -making about 
technologies.  
 
  
 
 
 37 Group  2 
Empower 
communities  Practical policies and 
program s Elements on 
freedoms and rights  Other relevant 
aspects  
─ Strengthened  digital 
governance.  
─ Technology 
construction policy 
from the academy.  
─ Involve design, 
development, 
implementation and 
evaluation.  
─ Establish a structure at 
the national level, 
coordination in the 
implementation of 
digital policies.  
─ Access to community 
netwo rks. 
─ Synergies between 
actors in the digital 
world - same as in the 
analog world.  ─ Formal mechanisms for 
multisectoral 
participation.  
─ Mechanisms that 
facilitate the exchange 
of experiences.  
─ Provide the right to 
community networks.  
─ Establish global 
community access fund.  
─ Collaborative 
participation, 
understanding the role of 
each involved actor . 
─ The electromagnetic 
spectrum is a public 
good.  
─ Agree new guiding 
principles, based on 
human rights.  ─ Understand the needs 
of communities.  
─ Cybersecurity from 
elementary school 
education.  
─ Vulnerability of 
communities (poverty 
and resource  scarcity).  
─ Focused consultations 
to online and offline 
focus groups.  
─ Reaffirm the 
principles of the 
summit "Build upon 
what has been built".  
─ Vulnerability of 
sexual preferences, 
magnified in the 
Internet  ─ Training for public 
officials, soft 
skills, clear 
objectives and 
clear goals with 
monitoring   
─ Language as a 
barrier for digital 
inclusion and used 
dialects as a means 
of transmitting 
informatio n and 
knowledge.  
 
Key messages  
─ Freedoms and rights: mechanisms that facilitate the exchange of experiences.  
─ Identifying opportunities,  the GDC offers to reaffirm the contribution to digital inclusion.  
─ Locate all communities that are not on the daily agenda of governments and encourage their participation 
in policy formulation, allowing access to communities.  
 
  
 
 
 38 3.4.2 Key takeaways from the workshop empowerment and active participation in digital 
transformation  
Group  1 
▪ The State must create coordination mec hanisms, experts in the field, and international 
cooperation to generate technological solutions.  
▪ From the perspective of the public sector, integrate digital identity and interoperability in 
developing digital services that rural communities, natives or vulnerable populations, and 
people with disabilities need, thus putting the State at the service of society.  
▪ Generate value; we must train civil and public servants in soft skills and form 
multidisciplinary teams.  
▪ Clear objectives, a clear strat egy, and good follow -up and monitoring of all the progress of 
the matter.  
▪ It is suggested to have a local representative, national people by country, etc., to collect the 
information. It goes hand in hand with active and effective participation to create j oint 
strategies.  
▪ Generate the spaces and the appropriate environment and strengthen the soft skills of public 
servants to achieve a climate of trust with the peasant and native communities that allow the 
co-creation, co -design, and implementation of techno logical solutions to the general 
problems that affect them.  
▪ The United Nations can contribute to digital inclusion from different perspectives: 1) 
Generating spaces for debate in the different Member States on the matter, 2) Articulating 
efforts between th e public sector, the private sector, organized civil society, and academia to 
promote spaces of collaboration in the development of solutions that make it possible to 
close the digital gaps, 3) Generate a knowledge management platform for technological 
solutions to public problems that affect vulnerable populations, rural communities, or 
people with disabilities and share it with the member states; 4) Grant funds to finance 
technological projects with a high social and environmental impact that allow the di gital 
inclusion of vulnerable groups or rural areas, and 5) Create training spaces on the use and 
operation of digital technologies and emerging technologies.  
▪ Make good use of what we already have, governments can make participatory mechanisms, 
but we can also use what we already have, such as the United Nations system, sectoral and 
commissions that guide the implementation of the GDC, not only creating sound principles 
but also with ideas and good use of them.  
▪ Support communities to have a voice and vote.  
▪ Freedom of expression, analyze how it can be approached from knowledge.  
 
Group 2  
• Ranking to account, we use the example and the idea of doing a similar approach to good 
digital inclusion practices.  
• How this relates to the GDC platform in principles and ideas.  
• Determine the process you want to give communities around artificial intelligence and how 
that works.  
• Elements that make us rethink the environment from academia about digital environments.  
 
 
 39 • Do not lose sight of the fact that countries  must have the access speed, transmission rates or 
bandwidths that are provided to uncovered communities.  
• Sustainable, responsible digitization that leads to terms such as electronic waste.  
• Important to consider green communications.  
• Semiconductors and raw  materials, sourced from many countries. Take into account 
responsible consumption.  
• The GOC can suggest to the signatory states that they carry out their national internal 
processes to comply with the GDC with the participation of multiple stakeholders. Th is is 
important to ensure all relevant stakeholders' continued participation.  
 
 
 
 40 4. Open space on topics not addressed  in the agenda   
Representatives of civil society from across the Americas working on human rights and technology 
proposed and facilitated an open conversation on issues not addressed on the agenda on the second 
day of the Consultation of the Americas. The conversation took place in an informal round table 
format. It was proposed to focus on how the Global  Digital  Compact can reinforce human rights, 
considering that several instruments currently recognize that human rights apply online and offline.  
Several c hallenges in the region were recognized inside and outside the digital sphere, particularly 
concerning historically marginalized communities such as LGBTQ+, Afro -American, and indigenous 
groups. During the conversation, the participants highlighted the fol lowing key messages for 
consideration in the discussions on the Global  Digital  Compact:  
▪ It is essential to include vulnerable groups in discussions and decisions about technology.  
▪ Human rights considerations related to the development and deployment of te chnologies and 
connectivity and access policies should consider the specific needs of migrant populations in 
the region.  
▪ An intersectional gender approach is necessary when considering adopting measures on 
connectivity and access.  
▪ The intersectional gender  approach should be the basis for designing, adopting, and 
implementing digital technology policies.  
▪ It is necessary to establish concrete measures to limit and control the development, 
acquisition, and deployment of surveillance technologies - which have been used to violate 
fundamental rights in the region.  
▪ It is necessary to advance measures to strengthen the protection of privacy and personal data 
with specific guarantees for children and adolescents.  
▪ When developing and using technologies, it is essent ial to consider the different gender 
variants and reflect on how currently artificial intelligence and automated decision -making 
affect the lives of the LGBTQ+ community from the use of mass surveillance tools or facial 
recognition tools that reproduce vio lence and patterns of discrimination, so that they do not 
become echo boxes for biases that put the fulfillment of fundamental rights of certain groups 
at risk.  
▪ It is necessary to establish liability mechanisms for technology companies about potential 
abuses and violations of human rights and effects on the environment so that they consider 
elements of transparency and accountability.  
▪ From the perspective of public policy, it is essential to apply a systemic approach based on 
evidenc e when one wants to address universal connectivity, digital public goods and digital 
inclusion, for which it is necessary to: 1) Focus and identify the human rights that are may 
be affected in the matters to be dealt with, 2) Determine the scope of the mat ters to be dealt 
with, 3) Determine the magnitude and impact of public problems by matters to be dealt with; 
4) Identify, focus and segment the target audience or affected population; 5) Hold meetings 
with the active participation of the affected public an d other interest groups to propose 
solution alternatives; 6) Review national and international good practices in solving the 
identified public problem; 7) Select the solution alternatives after analysis of technical, 
budgetary and legal feasibility and ris k analysis; 8) Seek support and coordination with the 
private sector, academia, cooperating sources, and others; 9) Determine the control and 
follow -up mechanisms of the chosen alternatives, and 10) Have a technical team for the 
follow -up, control and eval uation of the results .
 
 
 41 5. Conclusion and perspectives  towards the future  
5.1 Amandeep Singh Gill, United Nations Secretary -General 's Envoy on  Technology . 
As a closing message, Mr. Amandeep Singh Gill, mentioned that in the exchange  rounds, there were 
contributions on human rights with extremely powerful testimonies about communities that are being 
left behind, so that by maintaining a focus on individual rights, a certain community focus is lost.  
He emphasized that public policies matter, referring to regulation and self -regulation, having 
confidence that the industry can do the right thing does not always happen. He mentioned that public 
policies must be applied at all levels, including the international level. To this end, smart regulations 
and govern ments must be generated, without excluding or discriminating against people.  
He also highlighted the tension of connectivity approaches, in the case of the internet, the words have 
a meaning, but it is not always very useful, so who will benefit from these  approaches must be 
considered.  
He noted that there was much mention on the intersectionality of the digital world, integrated into the 
analog world where digitization highlights many social gaps to be addressed and choices must be 
made by policy makers in  each country to address these gaps. A clear idea of the analog world in 
which we live must be maintained in order to address these issues . 
Another point that surfaced during the discussion dealt with the application of the future general data 
protection r egulation, at the international level there are principles, but it cannot allow machines to 
come to life without human authorization. He pronounced not to agree with the statement that 
technology is neutral, and from his perspective, shared that technology  instead of being neutral, it 
reflects  values.  
Lastly, he considered that the discussion during the two days of the Americas Consultation was highly 
useful  in the lead up to the Global Digital Compact . He expressed his gratitude for the collaboration 
of all the participants and the diversity of ideas that were generated during both days. He also thanked 
the hosts in Mexico and the German government for the organization and support during the regional 
consultation phase. He hopes that the building of knowledge will continue, as this is the best way to 
build international learning.  
 
 
 
 42 Annex.  
Universal Connectivity  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 43  

 
 
 44  

 
 
 45 Equity in Access  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 46  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 47  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 48 Empowerment and Participation  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 49  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 50  
 
