1 
  
Contribution of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Global Digital Compact  
April 2023 
 
1. Certain components of favorable vision  for cyberspace : 
 
 The favorable cyberspace is a global ecosystem consisting of digital 
domains under sovereignty of the States and its entangled societal systems based 
on the regulated interactions of actors on the basis of independent, interoperable 
and manageable networks with the ability to apply sovereign rights of the States 
and the national jurisdiction of the countries, whi ch has the following 
characteristics:  
1. The favorable cyberspace has the ability to be designed, developed and managed on the basis of fundamental principle and rights for the good and 
happiness of humanity, the high and common interests of human societies 
and in the service of purely peaceful goals and being free from conflicts, 
crimes, deviations and harms; 
2. The favorable cyberspace is lawful with the efficient and appropriate legal system and agreed fair, transparent and ethical principles and rules;  
3. The fa vorable cyberspace is just and multipolar based on the fundamental 
principles of the international law that the sovereignty of the States is 
respected in its ecosystem and the digital sovereignty and balanced 
approach to the rights and duties of governments are recognized;  
4. It has a new, multilateral, fair, non- discriminatory, transparent and 
responsible governance framework with the equal participation of all 
countries and a regulatory system with the approach of benefiting from the 
consultation of stakehol ders, considering the leading role of the States in 
this field;  
5. The favorable cyber space is secure, stable, safe and healthy, development-
oriented, neutral, peaceful, free from violence, trusted and is a platform for 
the growth of virtues for everyone as well as supporter of the stability, 
national security, national solidarity and coherence, and security, integrity 
and health of all national systems; 
2 
 6. It is free from unilateral coercive measures as those measures are major 
obstacle in the decision-making system based on the sovereignty of the 
States, as well as an impediment in the way of the digital transformation of 
nations, or their benefits from global networks and the development of information and communication technologies. Likewise, barrier for the 
benefit of users from their rights in digital ecosystems; 
7. Supporter of the decision-making system based on the national sovereignty 
of countries, supporter of social justice, driving force of  productivity and 
economic prosperity, facilitator of transparenc y, public supervision and 
fight against injustice and corruption in all forms and manifestations;  
8. Having responsible, capable users with valid digital identity, literacy and 
skills necessary for safe living in cyber ecosystems; 
9. It has fair distribution of digital resources and benefits resulting from 
global networks and information and communication technologies;  
10. It has Balanced, two -way, and regulated circulation of useful, valid and 
reliable information, while it has local and context based content modera tion systems for harmful and illegal content against individual and 
society in consistence with national law and values;  
11. In this space the fundamental national rights and values are guaranteed, the 
right of digital self -determination and the right to devel opment of countries 
are recognized, and all countries have the right to determine their own 
model of development and governance in this new ecosystem in a fair and 
equal manner;  
12. It has efficient, fair and transparent framework of accountability and 
respons ibility for all the actors (in particular, accountability of powerful 
and influential actors, including cross -border service providers according 
to the laws and regulations of the country where they have digital presence, 
effect and activity);  
13. It has safe,  trustworthy, flexible and interactive infrastructures within the 
framework of technical and security standards accepted by all the 
governments;  
14. In the favorable cyber space, the countries respect each other’ s rights in 
choosing their own model of development, governance, regulations of 
cyber space and public policy concerning the internet issues. States have 
3 
 right to operate own cyber space in line with their national law. They have 
jurisdiction on infrastructures, data, resources, services and related 
activities to information and communication technologies in their own 
territories. Likewise, they have right to protect of their civilians, systems and digital resource against threats, crimes, damages, disruptions, cross-border attacks, subversion and foreign interference to defend their own rights, fundamental values and legitimate interests in cyber space;  
15. In the favorable cyber space, no country should seek digital dominance, colonialization and unilateralism. No country should use cyber space, the internet and communication and information technologies for intervention 
in the domestic affairs of other countries, or should not support or 
participat e in the cyber activities that undermine the security, sovereignty 
and stability of other countries, by misusi ng its superiority in the 
cyber space;  
16. All countries should enjoy necessary capacities and tools for exercising 
sovereignty in the cyber space in order to manage possible risks and harms 
caused by the global networks and services provided on their platform, and should protect all societies particularly children, women and families vis-à-vis negative effects and consequences of cross- border illegal, c riminal 
and harmful contents and activities in the internet, digital platforms and 
emerging virtual environments including Metaverese;  
17. The favorable cyber space enables the digital economy in a balanced, safe, comprehensive and multilateral manner;  
18. Protect ing and expanding cyber space in the favorable one, respect 
environment and safeguard the environmental assets of the countries;  
 
2. Connecting all people to the internet, including all schools  
2-1—Fundamental Principles  
 
1. Regular, Safe, fair, free, reliable a nd affordable access to all 
communication resources and cross-border data flows under the 
national rule and laws;  
2. Secure, Sustainable, resilient, stable and regulated global networks consisting of public digital infrastructure and independent and 
4 
 interoperable networks (under the sovereignty and management of the 
governments) based on rules and protocols agreed upon by all the 
countries;  
3.  Global networks should be reliable, peaceful and development 
oriented, and connection to the global networks sh ould not mean the 
entry of citizens or businesses or governments into the new arena for 
creating conflicts and expanding battlefield;  
4. Fair distribution of resources and opportunities of connectivity and 
digital inclusion, so that the existing gap between the north and south 
countries should be prevented and reduced;  
5. Respecting to principles, values, high interests, the national identity 
system, ethical and moral standards and cultural sensitivities of nations and values of global religions, by all the activ e players in cyber space 
and ecosystem of internet governance, including in the field of international cooperation;  
6. Respecting sovereign right of the States in choosing digital development model and determining policies in the field of connectivity 
and acc ess and management model for access with regard to local 
context based on domestic laws;  
7. Respecting and protecting cultural diversity, linguistic diversity and 
local content in the international cyber space;  
 
2-1-2- Actions and Commitments for realization of the Principles  
1. Strengthening international cooperation in the digital capacity building filed based on priorities and needs of the recipient countries, in a non-
discriminatory manner and without intervention in the domestic affairs 
of the countries and compatible with their economic and social 
conditions;  
2. Joint efforts to create multilateral, fair and transparent governance 
system with equal participation of all countries in their important and strategic decisions of global networks including the interne t; 
3. Setting internationally agreed rules and regulations by all States in the 
area of providing and using of services of satellite internet and activities 
of providers of all connectivity and access services to global networks, 
including satellite systems i n respect to sovereignty of States and in 
consistence with requirements and law of recipient countries;  
5 
 4. Ensuring necessary political and legal guarantees by key players 
including dominate States and institutions over global networks and 
services provided on their platforms for non- abuse of them to realize 
the illegitimate goals and illegitimate interests including:  
 
-Non -application of discriminatory policies and unilateral coercive 
measures by the governments and institutions that have dominance, 
monopoly  and authority over the infrastructure, technology, services 
and vital resources of global networks and the internet;  
-Inclusive connectivity to global networks and access to services provided in their platforms should not become a tool for systematic violation of national sovereignty and intervention in the internal affairs 
of States;  
-Inclusive connectivity to global networks and access to services provided in their platforms should not damage national stability and security and undermining security and s tability of economic, social and 
cultural systems of countries;  
-Inclusive connectivity to global networks and access to services provided in their platforms should not be used as a tool for leading and organizing chaos and insecurity, inciting violation through organized 
dissemination of disinformation and hate speech campaigns against 
countries and religions;  
5. Improving international cooperation in exchanging technology, 
knowledge and experience in the field of information and communication 
technology in a non- discriminatory manner, with regard to the effects of 
digital space on all legal, political, civil, economic, social and cultural 
aspects;  
 
2-2 - Developing Digital Education based on Justice and Values  
 
1-2-2- Fundamental principles    
1. Providing safe, fair, free, legal and reliable access to useful and 
trustworthy educational resources for all ages and languages;  
2. Creating global networks of scientific content and knowledge based, consisting of independent sub - networks under the governance and 
management of governments and interoperable on basis of the rules and 
protocols agreed by all countries;  
6 
 3.  Empowering, educating and training users in a proper way for a healthy 
and safe life in cyber space based on principles, values and educational 
principle s governing the official education system of countries;  
4. Respecting and protecting cultural diversity, linguistic diversity and 
local content in international digital environment;  
5. Non-application of discriminatory policies and unilateral coercive 
measures by the governments and institutions that have dominance, monopoly and authority over content provided on scientific global networks;  
 
2-2-2- Actions and Commitment for Realization of Principle  
1. Strengthening international cooperation in the exchanging knowledge, 
technologies and best practices in the field of development of digital 
education in a non – discriminatory manner;  
2.   Formulation and implementation of the national digital transformation 
programs in the field of education with the aim of establi shing 
educational justice, inclusive education with quality and lifelong 
learning, based on the model of local development programs, values, 
policies and the roadmap of the national education system in all 
elementary, secondary and vocational levels;  
3. Establishing appropriate and efficient framework at local level for 
digital training in certain fields including: investment, infrastructures, 
networks, products, contents, services and digital systems and creating 
special protected, healthy and safe environments for children and 
students;  
4. Implementing national programs for improving literacy and digital 
skills for schools, with the aim to train responsible, capable users with appropriate skills for digital ecosystem and to provide safe and equal 
participation i n the society and in the digital economy and to prevent 
and fight against all forms and manifestations of emerging risks, crimes 
and damages of the digital ecosystem; 
5. Prohibiting unilateral coercive measures in the cyber educational space with the aim of f ully realization of international cooperation and 
interactive with relevant institution and non -blocking of IP address of 
countries due to compliance with of unilateral sanctioned imposed by 
certain countries;  
7 
 6. Free and non - discriminatory access to online  platforms by educational 
and scientific community for participation in online educational 
meetings and workshops including virtual meeting of the UN as well as 
non- applying restrictive in access to information, education and 
scientific bases;    
3. Trust and Internet Fragmentation  
3-1- Fundamental Principles  
1. The applicability of a wide range of principles of international law in cyberspace, including the principle of equality of sovereignty,  refraining 
and prohibiting the use of force, and non -interference in the internal affairs 
of other countries in and by using cyberspace;  
2. Guaranteeing, respecting and safeguarding the sovereignty of member 
states in all layers and dimensions of cyber space (in the field of 
infrastructure, data, digital re sources, services, information, content, 
process, users);  
3. The principle of respect for independence and the right to digital self - 
determination of countries and right to determining model for digital development;  
4. Respecting the right of countries for deve lopment and the right to select 
the model for governance on digital ecosystem and regulatory system in the jurisdiction of countries and within the framework of national laws, for 
the protection of public rights and interests;   
5. Negation of all manifestati ons of digital colonialism and unilateralism in 
all layers of cyber space;  
6. Following shared interests and real multilateralism in internet governance 
by promoting the role of governments and improving consultations with all multi-stakeholders and creating transparent, accountable, democratic 
international internet management system with the equal participation of 
all countries and dealing with monopolization in its management;  
7. Equal participation of countries in governance and decision-making 
process relat ed to international cyber space and internet management, 
based on common obligations and responsibility of all member states for materializing the favorable vision(while according the paragraph 69 of the Tunis Agenda there is need for enhanced cooperation to enable 
governments to carry out their roles and responsibilities, in international 
8 
 public policy issues pertaining to the Internet,  the enhanced cooperation 
has yet to realize);  
8. Geopolitical neutrality of the internet during international crisis and conflicts and preventing misuse of information and communication 
technologies and prohibition of using the Internet and cross-border digital platform as a weapon to achieve illegitimate geopolitical goals;  
9. Internationalization of the public core of the inter net as a global public 
goods;  
10. Shaping fair cyber order and smart, efficient and proper law system to 
entail all interactions in all layers and main organs;  
11. A peaceful goals and application, violence -free cyber space (only peaceful 
goals and objectives), pr omotion of stability and security in using IC Ts 
with emphasize on prevention of cyber hostilities and harmful and peace -
threatening activities, international stability and security and peaceful 
settlement of international disputes;  
12. Necessity  of accountability of cross- border platforms before users, public 
and the regulatory system of countries and transparency of their processes, 
performance and digital presence while respecting the laws and values of 
societies;  
13. Not to follow the policy of cultural assimilation and imposing their values 
and lifestyles on other societies by dominant countries in the cyberspace 
and supporting cultural diversity and multilingual ism on the internet;  
14. Observing the concerns and national interests of all countries in a balanced 
manner in the process of development, governance, norms, rules and 
standards setting of the global digital ecosystem; 
15. Enabling equal digital development for all countries;  
16. Effective international cooperation for dealing with international challenges related to cyberspace;  
 
3-2-Actions and Commitments to Realization of the Principles:  
 
1. Supporting the favorable vision and architecture of cyber space by Global 
Digital Compact that are mentioned in this text;  
2. Collective and dedicated efforts to materialize needed treaties in order to 
regulate fair and balanced international relations in the cyber space, 
including the comprehensive convention on cyber security and information 
9 
 and communication technologies and setting  of the comprehensive 
convention against the use of ICTs for criminal purposes;  
3. Collective efforts for creating governance framework for cyber space and 
internationalization of internet management within the framework of United Nations based on genuine  multilateralism and consultation with 
relevant stakeholders as well as justice, ethic -centered, political neutrality 
and other principles and norms accepted by all countries, based on considering respect for the legal system and national laws of co untries;  
4. Providing comprehensive and obligatory framework for the responsible 
behavior of countries in the cyberspace, taking into account the opinions 
and concerns of all member countries;  
5. Collective and dedicated efforts for determining and creating the 
mechanism of effective cooperation of the member States in providing the 
global framework of principle, norms and rules governing the 
accountability of cross-border digital platforms to governments and users (in the fields of data protection, dealing with criminal and harmful content, 
legal representative and competition and ...)  
6. Creating necessary framework for strengthening needed arrangements, regulations, capacities and capabilities in order to apply national sovereignty in the cyber space;  
7. Creating tec hnical- legal system of independent and interoperable  networks 
(designing the framework of interaction and cooperation among national 
information networks of the countries within the framework of a new 
architecture);  
8. Reforming the management of names and domains mechanism as well as 
internet public resources and infrastructures in the context of equal participation of all countries with the aim of managing harms and risks, 
fighting against cybercrimes and ensuring online safety;  
9. Creating the system of respo nsibly for all states vis-à -vis the behavior of 
big technology companies and owner of cross- border digital platforms 
registered in their countries, and obliging them to respect the rights of users, national sovereignty of other countries, and compliance w ith the 
laws and regulations of the countries in which they have digital presence, 
activity and influence;  
10. Making the efforts to establish digital identity system in the national and 
international level, while respecting the national law of service recipie nt 
countries;  
10 
 11. Creating necessary frameworks for guarantee the ethical, human, cultural 
and social considerations in the process of designing and developing digital 
ecosystems, technology, innovations and digital services;  
12. Creating necessary frameworks for protection and safeguarding the 
sovereignty of the countries in cyber space and the right of countries in 
choosing the model of digital development and cyber space governance 
based on national laws and values;  
13. Recognizing and guaranteeing the right of coun tries for development in the 
cyberspace and the need for prevention of unilateral coercive measures 
(UCM) against with the sovereign rights of the States and human rights, by 
certain Sates, technology companies and cross- border digital platforms; 
14. Collective, inclusive, fair, non-discriminatory and affordable access and 
usage of ICTs as well as in their managing and governing should be assured 
in respect to national conditions;  
15. Setting principle, norms and rules for responsible behavior of global digital 
platforms, including the requirement to establish a legal office by cross –  
border digital platforms in countries that they have influential presence and 
high penetration among users;  
16. Exploring the cooperation opportunities in the field of designing and creat ing joint regional digital platforms;  
17. Creating Data Bank regarding cyber laws and regulations of the countries, 
in order to inform all beneficiaries about the legal conditions of the 
countries;  
 
4. Data Protection  
4-1 - Fundamental Principles  
1. Respecting national data sovereignty, data localization, storage of 
citizens' data and digital sovereignty of the States;  
2. Considering legal processing, usage and sharing of data;  
3. Protection of countries’  digital assets (including cultural and 
civilization heritage in the field of digital content, big data and… )  
4. Developing regulated, trusted cross-border data flow, taking into 
account the considerations of data protection, security and national 
digital economy and the requirements of digital innovation and development;  
5. Observing justice and fairness in access to benefits and advantages of 
digital data;  
11 
 6. Facilitating digital trade while ensuring safe and secure data economy 
with respect to privacy and protection of data within the framework of 
domestic laws and regulations of the countries;  
7. Increasing trust in the digital economy;  
8. In using personal data by providers of services, they should respect 
fairness and transparency principles, legality of services accordance 
with national laws of service’ s recipient countries and proportional with 
defined objectives for their services and observing adequate and time 
limitation of providing services and informing data owners on using 
their data;  
9. Respecting national sovereignty, requirements of countries over their 
data of users in the area namely, sharing data, transferring data to other countries, national data, hosting and place of storing data, protection of 
sensitive data and big data;  
 
4-2- Actions and Commitments to realization the Principles  
1. Providing international legal frame works in the field of data governance, 
data security and regulated and trusted cross - border data flow, with respect 
for the principle of data sovereignty  by the States in the global information 
space including the formation of a global data treaty with aim of countering 
against misuse of data for illegitimate political and economic goals, 
assisting global challenges and supporting national priories (in the area 
including, sovereignty, security, governance, exchange, property rights and 
data economy, etc.);  
2. Countering against dominant role of certain cross - border digital 
platforms;  
3. Providing international indexes and reports regarding respect for the users’  
rights in the cross-border digital platforms; 
4. Obliging technology companies and cross- border digita l platforms for 
respecting laws of the countries in privacy and data governance;  
5. Reinforcing the main role of the United Nations in promoting a more balanced global data governance with the aim of benefiting all countries 
from the advantages and benefits of data and countering against the spread of injustice in this area;  
6. Strengthening international cooperation mechanisms in the arena of 
developing infrastructures and capacities to create, store, secure and absorb 
12 
 value from raw data in order to use data as a new economic resource is 
needed;  
7. Data and data flows can support the development of various solutions to 
global development challenges which for realizing, needs enhance international cooperation, technology transfer and capacity building as well as strengthening the capacities of the developing countries to harness 
data for achieving national development goals and having an equal 
participation by them in the data value chain;  
5. Applying Human Rights Online  
5-1- Fundamental  Principles 
1. Adhering the natur al and divine nature of human rights, human dignity, 
cultural diversity, the family, development, justice and equality before the 
law and non -discrimination, the right to freedom in accordance with the 
law and the right to security as fundamental values;  
2. protecting rights and legal and responsible freedom in digital ecosystem 
according to constitutional laws of countries and international 
commitments agreed by all countries, while protecting public rights, national security, public security, safety, health,  ethical and respecting 
other’ s rights (particularly by cross -border digital platforms); 
3. Supporting and strengthening the approach towards respect for cultural and ethical diversities among societies in regard to internationally agreed 
human rights princip les and taking into account their characteristics in the 
cyber space;  
4. Safeguarding the public rights and protecting privacy for digital communication, ensuring data protection at national, local and individual levels along with safeguarding national security at digital arena;  
5. Sticking balance between individual rights and freedoms and public interests in digital ecosystem; 
6. Universal and non-discriminatory access to information and 
communication technology and to their advantages and interests in the 
cyber space by all nations are necessary; 
7. Free and fair access of all people to the reliable and valuable knowledge, 
information and services for the growth of individual and society including 
scientific proposes based on national security and protecting the rights and 
interests of society and people;  
 
13 
 5-2- Actions and Commitments for Realization of Principles  
1. Providing necessary frameworks for identifying, pursing and countering 
against systematic violence of users rights in digital ecosystem including 
social media and international digital platforms; 
2. Developing principles, norms and regulations governing human rights commitments and obligations of technological companies and owners of 
cross -border digital platforms within the framework of UN.  
3. Forming n ormative frameworks to remove unilateral coercive measures in 
the cyberspace that prevent countries to access benefits of new communication and information technologies and global networks as a 
main barrier to achieving national digital development and vio lation of 
rights of nations;  
4. Developing internationally agreed indicators and reports by all countries 
regarding the observance of the rights of users in cross- border digital 
platforms; 
 
6. Introducing Criteria for Accountability for Discriminatory and 
Misle ading Content  
6-1- Fundamental Principle  
1. Accountability of cross- border platforms before users, public and 
regulation system of countries and their responsible digital presence while 
respecting national laws and values;  
2. Respecting national fundamental values, cultures and local sensitivities;  
3. Striking a balance between the rights and legal freedoms and the protection 
of society against harm and ensuring safety, health and psychological 
security of users on the Internet and online environments;  
4.  Respecting the transparency of procedures, algorithms and functions of 
cross -border digital platforms (regarding respect for user’ s rights, public 
rights, public safety, national security, morality, security of systems, 
content health, safety of platform,  policies of content moderation, 
cooperation with law enforcement and judicial authorities to prevent and 
combat ICT -dependent and ICT -enabled crimes);  
6-2- Actions and Commitments for Realization of Principles  
 
1. Regulating framework of digital platforms with management and content 
moderation approach based on local laws, culture and values with the aim 
to ensure users’  safety in online space and protection of societies 
14 
 concerning negative effects resulting from illegal, criminal and harmful 
content, while s afeguarding legal rights and freedom;  
2. Setting appropriate laws at the national and regional level regarding the prevention and fighting against illegal and harmful content on the Internet and cross -border digital platforms and determining the requirements,  
obligations and guarantees of their implementation in this regard;  
3. Providing accountability system for governments on illegal function and behaviors of big technological companies which are registered in their territories and owners of cross- border digita l platforms and their obligation 
regarding respect to the rights of users, national sovereignty of other countries and following up of laws and regulations of the countries which are active and have digital influence;  
4. Providing the system of accountability  for those who provide cross- border 
digital services, determining the obligation of platforms, search engines, emerging virtual environments based on the new generation of web and artificial intelligence such as Metaverse regarding the creation of legal representation, cooperating with competent national authorities and coping 
and preventing criminal, illegal and harmful actions and content (including 
child abuse, fake news, disinformation, spreading hate, incitement of violence, forgery and fraud, online harassment and… … .)  
5. Making the efforts for adopting preventive measures particularly for commercial companies relating to digital space for fighting against 
dissemination of disinformation and fake news regarding historical 
territorial, social, cultural, ge ographical identities of states and falsification 
of their territorial and historical realities;  
6. The requirement to have a legal operation and to establish official 
representation for cross- border digital platforms in countries that are 
influential and have a high penetration rate among their users;  
7. Criminalization of providing access, recommending and sharing all forms 
and manifestations of illegal and harmful content to children and teenagers, 
including, obscene content, pornographic materials, child sexual abuse 
martials, encouraging suicide, any content encouraging sexual deviations, 
promoting and normalizing incest and adultery, self -torturing and sadism 
and other sexual violence against women in national law and cybercrime conventions;  
8. Determining t he criminal responsibility of the owners of cross- border 
digital platforms regarding harmful content, services and algorithms and 
15 
 the lack of essential cooperation with the competent national authorities 
regarding countering against criminal and harmful ac ts and content and 
criminalizing the misuse of digital tools by the owners of digital platforms for illegal intervention violating national sovereignty and undermining stability, national security, public order and ethics in other countries by leading and organizing insecurity and chaos in other countries by not 
confronting or helping the organized dissemination of disinformation and 
hate speech campaigns and incitement to online violence via using algorithms based on artificial intelligence;  
9. Criminalizatio n of insulting the sanctities and values of divine religions 
and publishing defamatory and untrue content with the aim of destroying and tarnishing of divine religions, their leaders and followers on the Internet and digital platforms; 
10. Making collective cooperation between governments and owners of technology companies in the field of fighting against organized xenophobia, promoting racism and destroying the image of nations and religions on the Internet and international digital platforms; 
 
7. Improving the  Regulation of Artificial Intelligence  
7-1- Fundamental Principles  
1. Fundamental principles of international laws and principles and objectives, 
enshrined in the UN Charter in the development and deployment of AI;  
2. National sovereignty in providing data required for technologies and 
artificial intelligence systems; 
3. Protecting users’  rights and fundamental national values in the design, development and governance of artificial intelligence;  
4. Legal and legitimate purposes and peaceful uses of artificial inte lligence;  
5. Health and safety in artificial intelligence design and development;  
6. Designing and development of artificial intelligence based on values and moral considerations;  
7. Accountability and responsibility of designers, developers, organizers of 
products and services of artificial intelligence;  
8. Responsible innovation and non -harm to others, especially in the field of 
artificial intelligence;  
9. Transparency and ability to explain algorithms; 
10.  Non-bias approach in possesses, outputs and in decision-making of 
artificial intelligence -based systems; 
16 
 11. Not entrusting fateful decisions and related to life and death to artificial 
intelligence systems;  
12. Multilateral governance of artificial intelligence with participation and consultation of other stakeholders;  
13.  Prohibiting the production and proliferation of fully lethal autonomous 
weapons systems by using artificial intelligence, with lack of control and 
responsibility of the human agent and contrary to the ethical principles and 
rules of international law;  
 
7-2- Actio ns and Commitments for Realization of Principles  
 
1. Providing necessary frameworks for development and promotion of digital 
ethics based on values and legal and ethical frameworks of countries for 
designing, development, governance and use of ICTs in particular, 
emerging technologies and with participation of States and leaders of 
religions for forming reliable and ethical AI  ecosystem;  
2. Development of an appropriate international legal framework in 
development and application of artificial intelligenc e; 
3. Artificial intelligence developers should anticipate any unwanted deviation of the artificial intelligence towards criminal and harmful actions and 
provide the necessary control and prevention tools. These control tools 
should be explained to operators and users and made available to them.  
 
8. Digital Commons as Public Goods  
8-1- Fundamental Principles  
1. Digital fairness and justice (removing injustices and the digital divide in 
individuals and nations' enjoyment of advantages, opportunities, resources, systems, services, legal content, regardless of religion, ethnicity, nationality, gender, race within the framework of laws and values of 
societies);  
2. Internationalization of pubic core of internet as a global public goods;  
3. Respecting for independence and  digital right of self - determination of 
countries determining model for digital development;  
4. Respect for the right of countries for development and the right to 
determine the governance model in digital ecosystem and regulatory 
17 
 system in the field of judicial competency of the countries and within the 
national laws for the safeguard of public rights and interests;  
5. Avoiding unilateral coercive measures which prevent the realization of 
economic and social development for the population of effected countries 
and prevent them from fully benefiting of the advantages and benefits of 
communication and information technologies;  
6. Confronting technological monopoly as an element which prevent the 
growth of industry and digital development of all countries, particularly emerging countries in the process of technology; 
8-2- Actions and Commitments for Realization of Principles  
1. Recognizing and guarantee countries right to development in the cyber space and the necessity of confronting technology sanction and unilateral coercive measures against human rights ((in the fields of investment, 
infrastructure development, connectivity and access, digital resources, Hardware and software needed for digital development and transformation) adopted by governments and digital platform s; 
2. Creating governance framework and regulating digital joint affairs with 
emphasize on the principle of: safeguarding privacy, data, transparency 
cultural diversity within the framework of national laws and values and avoiding monopoly; 
3. Establishing a gov ernance framework and setting regulations regarding 
digital commons with an emphasis on the principles of privacy and data protection, transparency and accountability, avoiding concentration and monopoly, cultural diversity within the framework of national  laws and 
values;  
4. Designing and implementing of capacity building programs in the cyber field, including through digital commons, should be based on national 
development goals, national programs and needs of governments and in 
accordance with the economic,  social and cultural situation, and should not 
use as a tool for interfering in their internal affairs;  
5. Removing structural impediments of investment in the development of 
digital infrastructures and services, access and transfer of technologies and 
servic es needed for national digital transformation, as well as including 
unilateral coercive measures;  
18 
 6. Creating institutional mechanisms for dialogue and knowledge - sharing, 
expertise, experiences and digital technologies among countries at the 
international le vel; 
 
9. Other Areas:  
9-Digital Security and Trust  
 
9-1- Fundamental Principles  
 
1. Respecting sovereignty of governments in cyber space and non-
intervention in domestic affairs of governments through cyber space and 
non-intervention in cyber domestic affairs;  
2. Prohibition of threats or use of force against the territorial integrity and 
political independence of countries, including the prohibition of threats or 
use of force in and by cyberspace;  
3. Mutual respect in international relations, and peaceful coexistence  in the 
digital ecosystem and seeking fair pacifism;  
4. Peaceful cyber space free from violence (objectives and uses based on peace), promotion of stability and security in using ICTs based on 
prevention of cyber conflicts and harmful activities that threaten  
international peace and stability, and settlement of international disputes 
through peaceful means;  
5. Realization of the principle of cyber security for all (failure to secure 
oneself by violating the security of others);  
6. The right of countries to comprehensively defend their cyber territory 
against all kinds of cyber threats based on the scale and severity of the 
effects of cyber operations on the country's critical infrastructures.  
7. Geopolitical neutrality of the internet in international crises an d conflicts 
and prevention of misuse of information and communication technology 
and use of internet and cross- border digital platform as a weapon to achieve 
illegitimate geopolitical goals;  
8. Inclusive protection of societies before threats, crimes, cyber hostilities and harms resulted from illegal activities and content, threatening and 
weakening security, stability, safety, interest and values of countries;  
9. Prohibition of production and use of fully lethal automatic weapons by 
using artificial intelligence  which is contrary to moral principles and rules 
of international law;  
19 
 10. Increasing the confidence of countries regarding the use of the Internet and 
information and communication technologies;  
11. Designing and developing based on safety and security requiremen ts 
(Security and Safety by design);  
12. Transparency, trace ability and digital documentation;  
13. Increasing transparency and reducing the misuse of anonymity in cyber 
space with the aim of preventing abuse and dealing with the use of ICT for 
criminal purposes (designing an internet architecture based on security and safety);  
14. The need for governments to be responsible and accountable for the illegal behavior of their respective cross-border digital platforms in the information spheres, regarding creating and fueling insecurity and instability in other countries and incitement to violence through the 
organized dissemination of disinformation, criminal and harmful content 
(registered in its territory and licensed to operate);  
15. Joint responsibility of governments particularly the governments having domination on technology and infrastructure, for providing security and 
safety for digital ecosystem, based on respect for sovereignty and security of the countries;  
16. Adhering to technical, legal and related considerations in the complex 
process of attribution in cyber incidents;  
17. Protecting national critical infrastructures against cyber threats and 
ensuring supply chain security;  
 
9-2- Actions and Commitments for Realization of Principles  
 
1. Strengthening a global committed effort to promote international 
cooperation for counting against cybercrimes and threats through shaping 
fair and balanced needed treaties to regulate international relations in the 
cyberspace, including the comprehensive convention on cyber security - information and communication technology and establishing criminal 
justice by forming the comprehensive convention for fighting against the use of ICT for criminal purposes;  
2. Creating international legal mechanism for prevention and peaceful settlement of inte r-governmental disputes in global cyber space;  
20 
 3. Development of commitments, standards and necessary capabilities for 
ensuring the security of vital national infrastructures vis-à -vis cyber threats 
and to ensure supply chain security; 
4. Development of new principles and norms of current international rights and completing balanced and obligatory framework regarding the moral and behavior of member states in global cyber space, by taking into 
consideration the views, interests and concerns of all member states;  
5. Preventing and countries against the use of information and 
communication technology for criminal purposes and effective 
international cooperation in the field of seeking and pursuing cybercrimes, 
including the exchange of information and digital evidence ; 
6. Preventing, managing and effectively countering against all verities of criminal and harmful actions and content in the cyber space with the aim 
of ensuring the safety of users and comprehensive protection of the rights, 
interests and values of societi es, including maintaining stability, public 
order and security, cultural and civilizational identity, safety and public health and public morality in online environments;  
7. developing common standards and procedures for exchanging digital evidences for seeki ng and pursuing cyber - crimes;  
8. Creating the necessary mechanisms to communicate the judicial authorities 
of all countries through an online platform, structured, safe, secure, fast, 
integrated and accessible to the competent authorities of all countries;  
9. International cooperation in dealing with the Dark  Web and anonymization 
networks as an enabling environment for all kinds of illegal activities and 
organized crimes; 
10. Creating necessary frameworks for safeguarding and protecting the 
sovereignty of the countries in cyber space and the rights of the countries 
in choosing the model for digital development and the governance of cyber 
space based on national laws and values;  
11. Preparing an effective cooperation framework among the custodians of the 
internet go vernance ecosystem as well as the guardians of the IP and 
management system with law enforcement and judicial authorities of the countries in the prevention and fight against cybercrimes;  
 
10. Cultural – Social  
10-1- Fundamental Principles  
 
21 
 1. Respecting principles, values, interest, national identity, ethical criteria and 
cultural sensitivities of world religions, by all players who are active in 
cyber space and ecosystem of internet governance;  
2. Empowering users and giving them appropriate training for sa fe and 
healthy existence in cyber space, based on principles, values and 
educational foundations of societies;  
3. Protecting the values of the holy institute of the family as a fundamental unite of society and maximum protection for children and respecting their rights in online space within the framework of national laws and treaties 
agreed by each country;  
4. Ethic and morality - oriented approach in the internet and respect to 
cultural -social considerations of the countries in the development of 
infrastructure, content and services;  
5. Respect for cultural diversity, linguistic diversity and native content in the 
context of information society and international cyber space;  
6. Safeguarding digital cultural heritage of the nations and also the nati onal 
identity elem ents in cyber space  and emerging virtual environments;  
7. Guarantee safety and health and harm prevention in digital ecosystem (in the contents, services, infrastructures, websites, tools);  
8. Not causing harm and damage to others in or through cyber space and 
virtual environment;  
9. Taking into account the ethical aspects of information and communication 
technology and other aspects of cyber space;  
10. Responsible innovation based on ethical values and not harming others, 
especially in the field of artificial intelligence;  
11. Taking notice on special social groups including children, youth, elders, physical and mental disabled people;  
12. Protecting environment by using information and communication 
technology; 
 
10-2- Actions and Commitments for Realization of Principles  
 
1. Providing necessary frameworks to guarantee respect for humanity, 
ethical, moral, cultural and social considerations in designing and developing digital ecosystem, technology and innovation;  
2. setting program for promoting countries capacities in the field of production and dissemination of native contents with the aim to preserve 
22 
 and promote cultural and civilizational identity and heritage of the member 
countries in the platform of cyber space;  
 
11. Digital trade and Economy  
11-1- Fundamental Principles  
1. Regulated, trusted cross- border data and information flow, respecting 
sovereignty considerations including data sovereignty, national digital security and economy;  
2. Avoiding unilateral coercive measures that prevent the people of targeted 
countries from full realization of economic and social development and 
deprive  them from fully benefiting from the advantages and benefits of 
information and communication technologies;  
3. Net neutrality with the aims of creating a level and fair playing field for the 
develop ment of innovation and create equal parts for start- up companies 
and digital entrepreneurs (having equal behavior in the networks regarding access to website and services, based on equal opportunities for newly 
established companies and entrepreneurs);  
4. protecting competition and the rights of producers and consumers of goods 
and services in the cyberspace at the national and international levels;  
5. Benefiting from a valid digital identity within the framework of national 
laws and regulations;  
6. Fair and inclusi ve multilateral governance in the field of cross- border 
digital economy and trade, based on multilateralism and fair and transparent governing rules accepted by all countries;  
7. Facilitating digital commerce while ensuring a safe and secure data 
economy, and  respecting privacy and data protection within the framework 
of domestic laws and regulations of countries;  
8. Protecting the workforce, consumers and businesses in the field of digital 
economy and business;  
 
11-2- Actions and Commitments for Realization of Principles  
 
1. Creating independent and interoperable digital markets, while respecting 
the rights of the countries in regulating to achieve the objectives of public policies and respect for national requirements and regulations of digital 
markets at national and international levels, by the foreign actors;  
23 
 2. Creating an enabling environment for safe, secure, healthy, trusted digital 
trade, while respecting the national sovereignty of countries;  
3. Legal and responsible activity of cross -border digital platforms in  
financial, commercial and economic fields in the area of territorial jurisdiction of other countries;  
4. Collective collaboration for the setting and developing international 
principles, norms and rules to counter effectively against anti- competitive 
pract ices of big tech companies in the digital ecosystem, and also for abuse 
of technological companies from their dominant position to eliminate 
competitors and impose unfair and unilateral conditions on other actors;  
5. expanding digital entrepreneurship and str engthening relevant regulatory 
frameworks ; 
 
 
 