 
 
Submission to the  Global Digital Compact  
1. Thematic Area Input  
The overarching goal of our submission is to advocate for an unsiloed approach to transnational 
responsible artificial intelligence (RAI)1 governance, which has multidimensional overlaps with all the 
other recommended thematic areas in the Common Agenda Report.  We are conscious of the need for 
succinct and concrete inputs to best inform the content of and subsequent negotiations on the Glob al 
Digital Compact (GDC). For ease of reference, the following specific action areas as per the Roadmap 
format, inform our main contributions:  
i. Apply human rights online.  
ii. Protect data.  
iii. Promote regulation of artificial intelligence . 
iv. Digital commons as a glob al public good . 
2. Preparation Process  
The Data Economy Policy Hub (DepHUB) is the first independent think -tank founded by an indigenous 
African woman in South Africa. We aim to influence and provide public interest recommendations for 
evidence -driven holisti c inclusive digital transformation policy frameworks and contribute to the 
formulation of agile governance strategies that leverage responsible artificial intelligence for sustainable 
development (AI4SD) and data innovations in key growth -enhancing sectors , in sub Saharan -Africa 
(SSA).  
The DepHUB’s GDC submission is co -developed by various contributors, was formulated in consultation 
with a community of multi -sectoral actors from across Africa, through a  series of online and open 
stakeholder dialogues aimed  at formulating  multidisciplinary collective African voices, values, interests, 
visions, concerns, expectations that  should become part of the increasingly  global discussion on RAI, 
just public data value creation, and promotion of DPGs. The online dialogues took  place between 22nd 
February  and  9th March 2023.  
3. Recommended Core Principles  
We recommend the advancement of the following four  core principles to support global RAI 
governance2 that address collaborative global governance,  sustainable digital development, just public 
data value creation3 , and human -centred multicultural  ethics and values:  
i. Collaborative Transnational Governance:  Given our multidimensional global dependencies, R AI 
development and deployment should involve a collaborative international governance model 
that includes diverse stakeholders and incorporates sub -national, national, regional, and global 
 
1 Responsible AI principles require fairness, transparency, privacy, human safety, and explanability throughout the AI value ch ain. 
2 AI governance refers to the set of laws, policies, regulations, institutions, norms, and ethical guidelines that gov ern the 
development, deployment, and use of AI. The purpose of AI governance is to ensure that AI is developed and used in a responsi ble, 
transparent, and ethical manner, taking into consideration the potential social, economic, and ethical implications of  AI. 
3 Just public data value creation denotes that data in itself has no value and existing exclusions and bias in data sets and da ta-driven 
ecosystems inhibit who benefits from public interest data -driven decisions.  Just public data value creation emphas ises a human -
centred approach to collecting, using, and sharing quality data for positive impact and data innovations that capture the 
multidimensional aspects of data as a digital public good (DPG), protect data subject’s privacy, support the social contr act for data, 
and mitigates existing multidimensional inequities that arise with datafication of socioeconomic and democratic activity.  
 
 
considerations. This includes updating our individual and instituti onal capacities and 
competencies, our norms, standards and governance frameworks, our efforts to safeguard 
human dignity, and promote shared prosperity from the global digital economy.  
Many low and middle  income countries (LMICs ), (most which are African) operate from relative 
weakness at multilateral fora. There should be formal initiatives to address issues around 
inclusion, coordination, financial assistance, and capacity -building on global RAI governance . 
More needs to be done to ensure trust in enhanced multi -stakeholder collaboration with clear 
action -oriented interventions. This is crucial to build truly global consensus for technical 
standard -setting, capacity building, network development, and for addressing existing 
inters ectional inequities and existential risk that can be exacerbated by the development and use 
of AI, if there are no guardrails and risk mitigation interventions in place.  
Global governance for RAI should be transversal, developed collaboratively, and in con sultation 
with diverse stakeholders, including civil society, industry, government, and international 
organizations, particularly from LMICs. This promotes legitimacy, inclusivity, transparency, and 
accountability in the development and implementation of t echnical standards, regulation, policy, 
and legislation that shape global AI governance. Meaningful participation4 ensures that RAI 
governance initiatives are informed by contextually relevant needs and priorities, are 
accountable to the public, reduce mu ltidimensional inequities, build trust in supranational 
organisations, and support the principles of reformed multilateralism for the common interest.  
Leveraging RAI governance to promote digital commons as global public goods should focus on 
investments o n building multi -level technical capacity, institutions, infrastructure, innovation 
ecosystems and skills in LMICs to ensure their AI ecosystems and communities are empowered 
to leverage the benefits of RAI for their own development. This includes building  human capital 
by promoting access to AI -related education and training, as well as supporting the development 
of local AI ecosystems to enhance contextually relevant innovations and entrepreneurship 
throughout the AI value chain.  
ii. Sustainable Digital Devel opment:  Global RAI governance should support the sustainable 
development goals (SDGs), including reducing poverty, promoting economic growth, ensuring 
environmental sustainability, and improving access to basic services such as healthcare and 
education. Co llective action and agile governance is  required at the global stage to develop 
common visions, values and renewed objectives for sustainable digital development (SDD).  
Significant funding, capacity building, and institutional reform is needed at all polic y levels to 
ensure there are appropriate interventions that consider the multidimensional disruptions 
between data -driven digitalisation and sustainability. Negative externalities of digitalisation are 
often accelerants of existing inequities, market ineff iciencies, and unsustainable trends and must 
be mitigated. Global cooperation is required to co -create and ensure coordinated proactive 
interventions to mitigate these externalities —emission reduction and resource use, rewiring 
production and consumption v alue chains, combatting climate misinformation, reducing digital 
divides, and preventing rights  violation , to name a few.   
With regards to AI, there is an emergent need to consider the relationship between algorithmic 
systems, the sustainability of computi ng infrastructure, and arguments for climate and 
 
4 Meaningful participation refers to the active and meaningful involvement of diverse stakeholders, particularly those from 
developing countries, in the governance of transnational AI.  
 
 
environmental justice. These issues must be addressed by the global community in order to 
encourage and direct targeted investments that leverage digitalisation and frontier technologies 
to facilitate new kn owledge commons, the circular  economy, agile governance, industrial  
innovations, and an overall  just transition to a greener economy. The UN GDC must facilitate 
global dialogues on RAI sustainability opportunities, impacts, and challenges of restructuring 
economic, climate, and environmental activity  for co -creation of  scalable solutions that support 
a just digital circular economy, with considerations  of various techno -social contexts along value 
chains and ecosystems.  
iii. Just Public Data Value Creation, Data Protection, and Privacy:  The data -driven digital revolution 
presents an unprecedented opportunity for LMICs to harness digital resources that have 
potential to accelerate development objectives. Consequently, improving access to and 
discoverability of digital public goods (DPGs5) is crucial.  
Data as a DPG is vital, as the amount of data produced continues to grow exponentially with the 
data -driven d igitalisation of socioeconomic activity. Data is critical to understanding current 
challenges, anticipating problems, building future resilience, and developing prospective 
solutions for organisations, governments, businesses, and civil society.  Robust dat a governance 
guides best practices for responsible, ethical  data innovations  particularly in the context of 
leveraging interdependent data -driven digital technologies such as AI and machine learning 
(ML). A robust data governance framework is also an impo rtant component of enabling better 
quality and more granular data to achieve development goals, and ensure people’s digital rights 
are protected through  policy tools and frameworks that ensure just public data value creation  
and RAI.  
iv. Human Cantered , Multi cultural RAI Ethics, and Values: Development of  AI technologies should 
adhere to human -centered ethical principles, including transparency, accountability, fairness, 
safety, and respect for human dignity and rights. They should be developed and deployed in  a 
manner that maximizes the benefits to society while minimizing the risks and potential harms, 
particularly with regard to issues such as privacy, security, and bias.  
Human -centered RAI ethics should prioritize the well -being and interests of human being s and 
their respective responsibilities as stewards of the earth. It also requires ensuring that AI systems 
do not reinforce existing biases or discriminate against certain groups of people, who face 
intersectional systemic marginalisation.  
Multicultural e thics for AI acknowledges that different cultures may have different values and 
norms that need to be taken into account in the development and deployment of AI systems. 
This involves recognizing and respecting cultural diversity and understanding the pote ntial 
impact of AI on different cultures, socioeconomic realities, and communities beyond the current 
dominant normative framework of values, technical standards, and governance frameworks that 
shape global dialogues  
4. Key Actions and Commitments  
We recommen d the following concrete action items in the GDC:  
 
5 DPGs include not only open -source software, but open -source: content, artificial intelligence (AI)  models, standards, and data.  
 
 
i. Create a World Data and RAI Governance Institution, a representative multilateral 
structure that is reflective of contemporary geopolitical realities is required to address 
threats from frontier and emergin g technologies, growing wealth asymmetries, the 
disruptive role of non -state actors, and intensifying geopolitical competition. Significant 
efforts are needed to improve the coherence and consistency of various interdependent 
global systems to alter the ar chitecture for global sustainable digital development, 
equitable economic growth, and shared prosperity from the data -driven digital 
economy.  
ii. Create a Global RAI Governance Inclusive Framework  to facilitate the dialogue and 
governance on norms, technical standard -setting and legal frameworks for co -defining 
key RAI governance frameworks for digital sustainability in collaboration with  standard 
setting entities, member states and private actors.   
Formal action -oriented inclusive frameworks are required to ensure meaningful 
participation from diverse stakeholders for a truly global consensus on AI governance 
that is trustworthy, human rights -based, promotes peace, and supports sustainable 
economic development in a manner that reflects global interdependencies, various 
socioeconomic realities, and the rich diversity of our modern interdependent global 
society.  
Create funding mechanisms, technical capacity building, and varied edu cation 
programmes to strengthen capacity, skills and reflexivity needed to advance digital 
sustainability with the flexibility for signatories of the Inclusive Framework to contribute 
to global RAI governance that supports mechanisms to adapt RAI best prac tices to their 
contextual realities.  
iii. Support  RAI for Sustainable Digital Development . Encourage  strong commitment and 
strong alliances across state and non -state actors to enhance an unsiloed approach  to, 
stimulate demand, technical standard setting and re sponsible investments  in green 
digital infrastructures, products  and services, and innovations  that are contextually 
relevant to various socioeconomic realities.  
As part of the  Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability (CODES) , the DepHUB 
support s the CODES GDC Submission6 to reorient resources towards applied digital 
innovations for sustainable development , and advance sustainable development to the 
forefront of a just digital transition.  
iv. Promote Sustainable Open Source Innovations and Just Digital Public Goods . Utilize data 
for advancing the common good, globally. Develop a public good framework for various 
data, including climate and environmental data to  leverage sustainability assessments 
and global stock -taking.  Leverage existing  netwo rks and technical standards to ensure  
DPGs are open and accessible to all, with no barriers to entry and can be adapted to 
various innovation ecosystems. Leveraging DPGs for local innovation ecosystems should  
be transparent, accountable, and their code s hould be publicly available for inspection 
and use to support data interoperability and RAI technologies developed as DPGs. 
Harmonise technical standards to utilise quality data for advancing a DPG framework. 
Specify guidelines and actions needed for just public data value creation, sustainable 
digital development, promoting DPGs, and to inform institutional updates within 
 
6 https://www.sparkblue.org/codes -gdc-submission  
 
 
interdisciplinary mandates with cross -cutting policies, research agendas, and legislative 
frameworks at local, national , and global leve ls. 
v. Develop  Financing Mechanisms to Advance Sustainable RAI Solutions . Developing 
financing mechanisms to advance sustainable RAI solutions requires a coordinated effort 
amongst different stakeholders and a commitment to promoting sustainability and RAI 
practices. As part of the Global RAI Governance Inclusive Framework, a  decentralized, 
innovative financing mechanisms like crowdfunding, micropayments or payments for 
ecosystem services can be developed through the new recommended World Data and 
RAI Governan ce Institution . This can  facilitate harmonization, adoption, and monitoring 
of financial reporting standards that promote sustainable investments  for a just green -
digital twin transition.  
Establish funding opportunities, such as grants, loans, and venture capital, that prioritize 
sustainable RAI initiatives to incentivize investment in RAI initiatives that promote 
sustainability and RAI practices.  Leverage existing funding mechanisms, such as public -
private partnerships, impact investing, and crowdfunding, to support sustainable RAI 
initiatives to increase the resources available for sustainable RAI and broaden the range 
of stakeholders involved in financing RAI initiatives. Monitor and evaluate the impact of 
financing mechanisms on the development and deplo yment of sustainable RAI solutions 
to identify best practices and areas for improvement to ensure that sustainable RAI 
financing mechanisms are achieving their intended goals.  
 
  
5. Signatories  
Maha Jouini on behalf of the African Center for AI and Digital Technology ( ACAIT). Nouakchott  
Mauritania .  
Angella Ndaka on behalf of The Centre for African Epistemic Justice(CAEJ). Nairobi, Kenya.  
Michael Zimba representing African Union High -Level Panel on Emerging Technologies (APET)  
 
 