DCAD Submission to the Global Digital Compact  The Dynamic Coalition on Accessibility and Disability facilitates interaction and ensures that ICT accessibility is included in the key debates around Internet Governance to build a future where all sectors of the global community have equal access to the Information Society. Our goal has always been to ensure that the Internet and its benefits are fully and equally accessible to and independently usable by persons with disabilities, so they are able to acquire the same information, engage in the same interactions, and enjoy the same services within the same timeframe as individuals without disabilities, with substantially equivalent ease of use. In this vein, we have been working within the Internet Governance community to promote public interest in and knowledge of the necessity for accessibility for persons with disability and encourage enlightened accessibility measures worldwide. Also to communicate with the public and with engaged individuals concerning accessibility policies and tools   Entity/organization website https://igf-dcad.org/  Geographic Scope of Activity 1. Global Contact information for submission  Name Judith Hellerstein Title Co-Coordinator of the Dynamic Coalition for Accessibility and Disability Email Address  judith@jhellerstein.conm Email address   judith@jhellerstein.com  We are submitting these comments in three areas. Connecting all People to the Internet, Protect Data and third area titled Accessibility, Security, and Capacity Building  Connecting all people to the internet Connectivity for all. Must also include persons with disabilities or specific needs. Accessible technology can be a game changer for persons with disabilities.  We need to ensure that all schools have this equipment so that education can really be given to all equally.   Core Principles:  • Accessibility: ICT networks, services, facilities, equipment and applications should be as widely accessible as possible to all citizens, businesses and organizations, in all locations. Such access means that users can obtain and connect to the full range of networks and services in locations and via technical means that are appropriate and convenient to their locations, needs and capabilities.  • The need to follow and adhere to the Accessibility Standards promulgated by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and to achieve & maintain at least AA level compliance with Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (“WCAG”) for these websites, applications, and content.   
• Affordability: All elements required for ICT connectivity and use must be affordable to citizens & businesses of all incomes & economic conditions regardless of where they live. There should be basic, full-featured devices, services, and applications provided at low prices for those with lowest incomes, while higher-end products and services may be sold at market rates.   • Availability--These include both fixed, mobile, or space-based connections to homes, businesses, and public buildings, in both populated areas, along roads, and in the countryside.   • Affordability--connectivity and use must be affordable to citizens and businesses of all incomes and economic conditions regardless of where they live. There should be basic, full-featured devices, services, and applications provided at low prices for those with the lowest incomes, while higher-end products and services may be sold at market rates.  • A fast and reliable connection is one that supports applications like streaming videos online, in addition to web browsing. Meaningful connectivity requires that all users, including those in rural areas have access to sufficient network transmission connectivity and speed, sufficient data utilization caps at reasonable prices, and the ability to connect as frequently as needed to incorporate advanced ICTs in their lives.   • Usability--Citizens, businesses, and organizations must be able to utilize ICT facilities and services effectively, and appropriately, and such utilization should be measurable and ensured across all geographic and demographic groups.  b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions We promise to work will the MAG, Leadership Panel, IGF Secretariat, all NRIs, Best Practice Forums, and dynamic coalitions or other organizations to educate others on how to make documents, websites, videos, and social media more accessible. This goes from charts, graphs, and tables on social media. How to use ALT tags successfully and also the importance of labeling and describing photos or images. This also includes teaching about WCAG and the importance of using standards-based technology and not any of the overlay technology which does not work.  Many of these new social media platforms which combine Zoom, chat, and others into one merged platform often are not accessible to persons with disabilities.  The same is true for making a pdf.  PDF need to be accessible and not just a document or an image scanned in. These documents are not accessible but can be easily made accessible. This is why we had focused on capacity building and  so happy to teach about how to make platforms, documents, etc more accessible.  Protect Data  Core Principles:   User data must be protected. This is especially true for persons with disabilities as they are often the most at risk. Since many of the applications and software are not made accessible persons with disabilities need to give their Personal identifiable information such as passwords or ID to a person who is assisting them. They are often left at the mercy of others in filling out applications or getting cash or other critical parts of life when systems and software are not made accessible.  The trend to 
have everything be a touchscreen has put more roadblocks up since persons with disabilities cannot see what to press as these types of software are not made accessible. b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions We promise to work will the MAG, Leadership Panel, IGF Secretariat, all NRIs, Best Practice Forums, and dynamic coalitions or other organizations to educate others on how to make documents, websites, videos, and social media more accessible. This goes from charts, graphs, and tables on social media. How to use ALT tags successfully and also the importance of labeling and describing photos or images. This also includes teaching about WCAG and the importance of using standards-based technology and not any of the overlay technology which does not work.  Many of these new social media platforms which combine Zoom, chat, and others into one merged platform often are not accessible to persons with disabilities.  The same is true for making a pdf.  PDF need to be accessible and not just a document or an image scanned in. These documents are not accessible but can be easily made accessible. This is why we had focused on capacity building and  so happy to teach about how to make platforms, documents, etc more accessible. Additional Area Accessibility, Security and Capacity Building The DCAD wants to add a new Thematic area to the GDC since we feel that accessibility for persons with disabilities or specific needs is a cross-cutting theme and is not adequately covered by the other 6 themes.  The issues of accessibility and security cut across all thematic areas. The following core principles apply:  • The need to follow and adhere to the Accessibility Standards promulgated by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), specifically to formulate a plan for the IGF or other affiliated bodies such as the national/regional IGFs and any UN websites to achieve and maintain at least AA level compliance with Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (“WCAG”) for these websites, applications, & content.  • To the extent in use, any of the IGF or UN legacy websites, applications, & content would also be brought to the same standards as deemed reasonable, practical, & commensurate with the goal of benefiting the disability community. Other core principles are: • The need for meaningful involvement of persons with disabilities at all levels & to support meaningful participation of persons with disabilities & their representative organizations. • Education and capacity building to make others aware of accessibility roadblocks • Providing capacity building, sensitivity training, and awareness that not everybody responds in a similar fashion, a person with cognitive disabilities prefers to write out answers instead of speaking them  • Embedding disability inclusion in strategic plans and establishing institutional ownership. We need to build the knowledge and capacities of staff on disability inclusion. 
• Dramatically Improve physical and digital accessibility at venues where the IGF or the UN is hosting a conference and ensure that any hotel rooms, vendor showrooms, or in the IGF Village, and other communal areas of the conference center be fully accessible. • Last but not least, emphasizing the principle of ‘nothing about us without us’, which means not only including and encouraging representation of people with disabilities themselves in the decision-making bodies of IGF as MAG, but also in a leadership Panel, and all other UN processes hosted by the Tech Envoy and other UN bodies. Having persons with disabilities or advocates from disability agencies included in these leadership posts is more important than insisting on geographic diversity. b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions We promise to work will the MAG, Leadership Panel, IGF Secretariat, all NRIs, Best Practice Forums, and dynamic coalitions or other organizations to educate others on how to make documents, websites, videos, and social media more accessible. This goes from charts, graphs, and tables on social media. How to use ALT tags successfully and also the importance of labeling and describing photos or images. This also includes teaching about WCAG and the importance of using standards-based technology and not any of the overlay technology which does not work.  Many of these new social media platforms which combine Zoom, chat, and others into one merged platform often are not accessible to persons with disabilities.  The same is true for making a pdf.  PDF need to be accessible and not just a document or an image scanned in. These documents are not accessible but can be easily made accessible. This is why we had focused on capacity building and  so happy to teach about how to make platforms, documents, etc more accessible.  Would you like to be included on the email list for updates on future developments on the Global Digital Compact? If so, please include the specific emails to be added. 1. Yes (please provide email)Email---judith@jhellerstein.com Would you like to submit additional documentation in support of the information you have provided in this survey? 1. Yes  