 
1 UNITED KINGDOM  
 
CONTRIBUTION TO THE GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
 
28 April 2023  
 
1. Introduction  
The United Kingdom welcomes the UN’s invitation to share views and priorities relating to 
the proposed multi -stakeholder  Global Digital Compact (the Compact).  
 
Digital transformation is powering our economies, and accelerating human and social  
progress. Harnessed sustainably and responsibly, and with respect for human rights, the 
opportunities digital transformation offers are vast. For example:  
● Digital technologies have created new means through which individuals can exercise 
their human rights, and engage in political, economic, social and cultural life.  
● The Internet has increased access to information and allowed people to make their 
voices he ard.  
● Innovations in artificial intelligence, and the potential of big -data insights, mean that 
governments can deliver more efficient public services, and more evidence -based 
policy interventions.  
● Digital technologies are a crosscutting  enabler and accel erator of development and 
for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
 
At the same time, the digital revolution brings with it a range of potential challenges for public 
policy and society. For example:  
● The drivers of poverty reductio n, prosperity and security are increasingly complex 
and interconnected, and influenced by rapid technological change.  
● The cross -border nature of the digital economy challenges state -centric governance 
models.  
● The introduction of new technologies can have  unintended and unexpected 
economic, environmental, socio -political, and human rights impacts.   
 
As we adapt to the digital age, all stakeholders – governments, business enterprises, the 
technical community, civil society, academia and individuals themsel ves – have  a role to 
play in responding to those challenges. Seizing the opportunities of digital transformation, 
and making the associated benefits - for sustainable  development, human rights, security, 
prosperity – available  to all, must remain our shared goal.  
 
The Compact offers an opportunity for the multi -stakeholder  community to set an ambitious 
shared agenda  and concrete  actions to deliver it.  
2. A Multi -stakeholder  Approach to the Compact  
The Compact provides a unique opp ortunity to develop a shared agenda that is shaped and 
delivered jointly. Securing the buy -in and support of stakeholders who are central to building 
our digital future - governments, companies, technologists, civil society, and technology 
users - will be essential.  
 
  
 
2 The Compact should:  
● Aim to set a shared agenda, around which all stakeholders can coalesce and 
contribute to delivering.  
● Adopt an open, inclusive, transparent app roach that enables meaningful participation 
from the stakeholder community thr oughout the development of the Compact, 
including opportunities to attend and provide inputs during intergovernmental 
negotiations. Creative modalities, such as the formation of a multi -stakeholder  
drafting group,  should be considered. Hybrid participation  should be enabled 
throughout, for all stakeholders.  
● Continue to make effective use of opportunities to engage the multi -stakeholder  
community,  in particular the Internet Governance Forum (including at the 2023 
Forum in Japan) and i ts High Level Leadership Panel.  
3. Setting an Aspirational and Action -Oriented Agenda  
The Compact should be aspirational and forward -looking to ensure it is future -proofed 
against the rapid pace of technological change. A positive vision statement clearly outlining 
the dig ital future we want would provide important framing for any principles, or actions, 
agreed as part of the Compact.  
 
The impact of the Compact will be measured by its ability to accelerate  tangible action, 
whether in relation to increasing connectivity, or removing barriers to the enjoyment of 
human rights.  In this regard, it is important that the Compact does not duplicate or establish 
new structures that  would detract from the need for a concerted focus on implementation. 
We recommend that the Compact prov ides an action -oriented agenda, such as acting as a 
knowledge hub, through which stakeholders can share and learn.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Set an aspirational and forward -looking  agenda. A vision statement should provide 
framing for principles or actions ag reed as part of the Compact. The vision statement 
contained in Agenda 2030 could serve as a useful example of such an arrangement.  
● Promot e the sharing of good practices  and developing an evidence base to guide 
stakeholders . 
● Avoid creating new structures or duplicating  processes and discussions already 
underway within the UN, which would add greater complexity to an already crowded 
landscape.  
4. A Human -Rights Based Approach  
Digital technologies, the advent of the Internet, and other information a nd communication 
technologies have had a transformative impact on the enjoyment of human rights. For 
example, their use can enable individuals to peacefully assemble through coordinated online 
action; to seek information anonymously online to form their op inions and explore their 
identity without fear; and to document and share evidence of human rights violations and 
abuses to ensure accountability. Their use can play a key role in the progressive realisation 
of economic, social, and cultural rights: expand ing access to quality education, healthcare, 
and employment opportunities.  
 
At the same time, the use of these technologies, as well as the use of data, in the absence 
of proper safeguards, can have adverse human rights impacts, which must be protected 
against. We remain deeply concerned at the implementation gap that exists in relation to the 
promotion, protection, and fulfilment of human rights online.  
 
 
3 We welcome the efforts of the UN Human Rights Council, UN General Assembly third 
committee, and UN Tr eaty Bodies, and Special Procedures in highlighting concerning trends 
where human rights are being routinely violated and abused online. This includes in 
particular:  
● Legislation, policy frameworks, and regulation that are incompatible with or has a 
chilling effect on the right to freedom of expression.  
● Arbitrary arrests and detention of individuals for their online expression, including the 
organisation of peaceful protests online.  
● Actions that can contravene international human rights obligations, for exa mple:  
○ Blocking specific websites, social media platforms and messaging apps, 
where this does not accord with the requirements of Article 19(3) of the 
ICCPR.  
○ Slowing down the speed of the Internet connection (“throttling”) . 
○ Completely shutting down the Inte rnet.  
● Arbitrary or unlawful surveillance, including through the use of highly intrusive 
surveillance technologies, particularly against human rights defenders, civil society, 
political opposition, protesters, and journalists and media workers, with implications 
for freedom of expression, freedom of peaceful assembly, and freedom of 
association.  
● Online harassment and abuse, which can have chilling effects on the right to freedom 
of expression and political participation of women and girls, members of marginalised  
or vulnerable groups,  and individuals in public life.  
● The use of automated decision making, which may have implications for the principle 
of non -discrimination, or access to an effective remedy.  
● Implications for children’s rights, and in particular the ir exposure to risks of child 
trafficking and child sexual exploitation and abuse, through the use of the Internet, as 
well as the use of disproportionate parental controls (e.g. unfettered access to 
children’s private messages).   
 
We also welcome the ext ensive interpretive guidance within the UN system setting out how 
Member States can effectively meet their human rights obligations, and how business 
enterprises can meet their human rights responsibilities, in the context of the digital age.  
 
The Compact  should:  
● Mainstream human rights throughout, embedding a human rights -based approach to 
the Compact as a whole, including individual policy areas.  
● Champion the positive potential of new technologies, for the enjoyment of human 
rights, and to support enga gement in democratic processes.  
● Reaffirm that the same rights that individuals enjoy offline, must also be protected 
online.  
● Stress the need for the practical implementation of the existing human rights 
framework in an online context.  
● Highlight concerning  trends in restrictions of human rights online, and the use of 
technologies to restrict human rights online and offline. Reiterate States’ obligations 
under international human rights law to respect, protect, and promote human rights 
online, as offline.  
● Highlight concerning trends in relation to adverse human rights impacts associated 
with business enterprises and their design, development and deployment of digital 
technologies, and reiterate their responsibilities to respect human rights throughout 
their operations, in line with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights.  
● Promote the sharing of best practice and existing guidance to implement human 
rights obligations and responsibilities, for example:  
 
4 ○ Ensuring human rights compliant domestic le gal frameworks, particularly in 
relation to legislation that unduly restricts, or has a chilling effect on, freedom 
of expression and freedom of peaceful assembly and association . 
○ Promoting Internet freedoms including measures to keep the Internet on, 
open  and inclusive, and human rights compliant alternatives to dealing with 
issues such as security concerns and social unrest.  
○ The human rights compliant and responsible use of digital surveillance 
technology.  
○ Encouraging the incorporation of human rights c onsiderations in the design, 
development and use of digital technologies . 
○ Encouraging voluntary pledges by business enterprises, of concrete action 
they will take to ensure respect for human rights . 
● Give additional consideration to the protection of the ri ghts of children, in line with 
their evolving capacities.  
● Emphasise the need to ensure the protection and promotion of human rights when 
addressing digital public policy challenges such as   the spread of disinformation 
online; access to terrorist content online; or wider user safety concerns such as 
incitement to violence, hatred, and discrimination, as well as bullying and 
harassment.  
5. Mainstreaming Gender  
Women and girls, in all their diversity, do not enjoy equal access to the benefits and 
opportunities of the d igital age. A top barrier to women and girls’ digital inclusion is their 
disproportionate risk to discrimination and violence that occurs through or is amplified by the 
use of t echnology . As digital by default approaches increase in all spheres of life - from 
social communication, education, to employment and doing business - women and girls 
excluded from the digital world  are being  left behind.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Mainstrea m a gender -transformative, intersectional approach  across all its 
components, recogni sing the different needs, priorities, opportunities and constraints 
faced by women  and girls in all their diversity. It should ensure women and girls in all 
their divers ity, including adolescent girls, who are part of the most digitally -connected 
generation in history, in the development of the Compact, are empowered to 
participate in the development of the Compact itself.  
● Promote a gender -transformative approach to digit al transformation, in which women 
and girls not only access the benefits associated with the use of technology, but can 
also participate in its design, management and application.  
● Promote a gender -responsive approach in the design, development, deployment , 
and use of digital technologies, in  particular to address gender biases reproduced or 
exacerbated by th e way technologies are designed  or applied.  
● Promote efforts to address gender -specific  barriers to digital inclusion , including the 
prevalence of mis ogynistic hate speech, online sexual and gender -based violence 
and harassment, gendered disinformation, socio -cultural barriers.  
● Encourage Member States to develop gender -responsive national strategies on 
technology and innovation to  contribute to the empo werment of all women and girls 
and protect, promote and respect their human rights.  
● Promote efforts to address data gaps in national statistics databases, with regard to 
mobile and ICT access and usage by gender.  
● Recognise the intersectional nature of gend er-based harassment and abuse 
facilitated by technologies.  
● Include a call to stakeholders to promote the use of digital technologies to facilitate 
and accelerate women and girls’ access to educational opportunities at all levels.  
 
5 ● Include a focus on promoti ng digital literacy and digital skills development for women 
and girls, and access to lifelong learning opportunities to increase women’s 
representation in the STEM sector.  
● Stress the need to ensure gender is considered in the development of digital 
solutions in specific sectors, for example in digital financial services to enhance 
gender -equitable financial inclusion.  
● Highlight the need to promote, protect , respect, and ensure all women ’s’ and girls’ full 
enjoyment of the right to freedom of opinion and expressio n, both online and offline, 
and counter all violence or threats of violence faced while exercising this right.  
6. Future of the Internet  
Recognising the role of multi -stakeholder  bodies and all stakeholders  
 
The Internet we have today – a single,  global network of networks governed and maintained 
through consensus driven, multi -stakeholder  processes – has proven its resilience, 
maintaining interoperability, reliability and security even as the number of users has 
increased exponentially. The work of ICANN, the Regional Internet Registries (RIRs) or at 
Standards Development Organisations, such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 
and the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) – and collaboration between them - enables 
stakeholders to come togethe r around technical, operational, and policy challenges and find 
consensus on workable solutions that support the evolution and improvement of the Internet.  
 
The Compact should empower this multi -stakeholder community in its ongoing mission to 
uphold and  improve an Internet that enables  innovation and competition; supports 
democracy, open society values, and accessibility; is governed through inclusive and 
effective multi -stakeholder processes; maintains its vital security and resilience; and is 
technical ly scalable, interoperable, open and global. In doing so, the Compact should 
specifically recognise and respect the existing mandates of relevant organisations including 
the UN IGF, ICANN, the RIRs, IETF and the ITU.  
 
The multi -stakeholder approach on Internet policy issues has considerably benefited society, 
economic  prosperity, and human rights. This was demonstrable during the pandemic where 
businesses, civil society and the technical community worked together to expand 
connectivity in innovative way s: for example the use of community networks, and other 
connectivity innovations in hard to reach communities, such as the provision of affordable 
satellite links.  
 
At a more technical level, stakeholders have worked together effectively on complex public  
policy issues such as the ICANN process for new registrations of generic top -level domains 
(gTLDs) and through the IANA Transition process1, in which the historical role of the US in 
relation to the delegation of top level domains in the root of the Inter net, was relinquished.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Reaffirm a commitment to preserving a free, global, open, peaceful and secure 
Internet.  
● Reaffirm and highlight the important role of the multi -stakeholder community in 
building, maintaining, and continuously im proving the technical underpinnings of the 
Internet.  
                                                
1 https://www.internetsociety.org/iana -transition/  
 
6 ● Explicitly acknowledge the value of multi -stakeholder dialogue including with respect 
to the governance of the Internet.  
● Recognise and respect the existing mandates of relevant organisations including t he 
UN IGF, ICANN, the RIRs, and the IETF.  
● Encourage greater participation in Internet governance discussions from under -
represented groups, including in particular small and medium enterprises, 
representatives from less tech advanced economies, the scienti fic community and 
local civil society organisations, rural geographies and women.  
Working with the UN IGF  
 
We welcome action already underway to strengthen the Internet Governance Forum and 
increase its effectiveness. The Internet Governance Forum – and its corresponding national, 
youth and regional initiatives (NRIs)  – are a crucial platform for multi -stakeholder  dialogue on 
emerging challenges in Internet policy.  
 
The IGF was conceptualised (in 2005 during the WSIS process) as a platform to enable 
gover nments, the private sector and civil society to contribute to discussion on public policy 
related to Internet governance on an equal footing. This was intentional, to ensure an open 
format that would not lead to voting structures nor formal decisions being  imposed on any 
stakeholder group. Instead, a discussion -only platform would ensure all arguments could be 
freely expressed and captured in a non -binding messages document. Groups could then 
choose whether to take forward, or further explore, the ideas pre sented.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Welcome the IGF’s contributions (including from the Leadership Panel) to global 
digital cooperation.  
● Reinforce the IGF’s role as the multi -stakeholder platform for dialogue on Internet 
governance issues by committing government s to increase diverse participation at 
the annual Forum as well as its NRIs.   
Avoid Fragmentation of Internet Governance  
 
We share concerns a bout developments that may contribute to the fragmentation of the 
Internet, limiting or undermining the global, op en, interoperable nature of the Internet based 
on common technical standards and protocols and governed collaboratively by the multi -
stakeholder  community.  
 
This is a complex issue, and one on which there are different perspectives. We recognise 
the valuable work of the IGF’s Policy Network on Internet Fragmentation (PNIF), in capturing 
these perspectives in a common framework as well as working towards pr inciples and 
guidance to address and prevent fragmentation of various kinds. We encourage ongoing 
engagement with the PNIF  during development of  the Compact, and encourage 
stakeholders from across the community to contribute their experiences, perspectives  and 
expertise to identify  ways to prevent and address fragmentation.  
 
The PNIF’s framework exposes that the global, interoperable nature of the Internet can be 
undermined by fragmentation of its different dimensions, including user experience, the 
Interne t’s technical layer, and Internet governance and coordination. Technical, political and 
commercial developments can effect fragmentation of these dimensions in different and 
nuanced ways. Efforts should therefore be focused on preventing and addressing are as of 
fragmentation that pose the greatest risk to the global, interoperable Internet. These efforts 
 
7 should take account that different types of fragmentation will require different responses, and 
should be addressed through the appropriate forum by releva nt stakeholders.  
 
The Compact should:  
 
● Continue to engage with the work of the IGF’s PNIF in relation to efforts to address 
internet fragmentation.  
● Focus on the risk of fragmentation of Inter net Governance and coordination, 
recognising that a ctions which  result in multi -stakeholder  processes being 
undermined, or where coordination breaks down, can have critical knock -on effects 
for the global reach and resilience of the Internet.  
● Commit stakeholders to work together across the global multi -stakeholder  community 
to avoid fragmentation of coordination across the many Internet governance forums, 
standards bodies and other initiatives that collectively enable the open global 
Internet.  
7. Addressing Digital Divides  
 
Digital technologies as a cross -cutting enabler  for the SDGs  
 
Digital technologies are a  crosscutting  enabler and accelerator of development and the 
SDGs. While SDG 9 includes a specific target on connectivity for Least Developed Countries 
(LDCs ), digital development is a much broader agenda and underpins the SDGs in multiple 
areas. It includes both foundational elements (e.g. on affordable connectivity, basic digital 
skills, digital content and services, cybersecurity capacity, online safety, digital 
entrepreneurship – and their overall business environment) and the application of digital 
technologies to key sectors and use cases (e.g. education, health, financial services, 
renewable energy).  
Amid escalating, interlinked climate, health and food security crises, we need to accelerate 
the revolutio n in science and technology (S&T), digitalisation and data to build global 
resilience.  Enabling the exchange of ideas and exploring  ways to accelerate the 
development, application, and scaling up of digital and other technologies to fast -track 
progress on  the SDGs should be a key priority for the Compact.  
Meaningful Connectivity  
 
With 2.7 billion people globally still offline, it is essential that the Compact address this 
important topic. Digital divides persist between, and within countries and communitie s. 
Gendered digital divides continue to limit women and girls’ ability to participate fully in 
economic, political, social and cultural life, and undermine their enjoyment of human rights. 
Digital divides between generations, rural and urban dwellers, indi genous communities, and 
other minority groups exacerbate existing inequalities and hamper their access to the 
opportunities of the digital age.  
 
The Compact offers an opportunity to develop a common understanding of “meaningful 
connectivity”, the barriers to achieving it, and the action that can be taken to overcome them. 
Action is required on two complementary fronts: promoting access  to connectivity and digital 
technologies, and, where it is accessible, promoting  usage.  
 
In relation to access , evidence s hows that the most challenging aspect is addressing “last 
mile” connectivity: communities that are underserved or excluded by the mainstream market. 
Evidence shows that remote or low -income communities are often beyond the market 
 
8 frontier of large -scale op erator models. Therefore, complementary models such as small -
scale Internet service providers (ISPs) and wireless ones (WISPs), as well as ‘community 
networks’, are needed to extend the connectivity ‘supply chain’.  
 
Building an enabling environment for investment is key. Improvements in the transparency, 
predictability and clarity of the regulatory framework and licensing arrangements, as well as 
appropriate spectrum management, incentivise relevant private and local investment and 
enable innovative, inclusive technology and business models. The use of Universal Service 
Funds by governments should also improve in terms of targeting, effectiveness and support 
to last -mile solutions. Technical assistance and capacity bui lding at the market and 
community level help to make last -mile models more effective, sustainable and replicable 
and expand inclusive connectivity.  
 
To increase usage, the social and cultural context matters. The underlying nature of the 
barriers will var y across regions and communities. They include, for example, social norms 
that impede specific groups, including women and girls, from engaging in the digital world; 
availability and effectiveness of digital skills development; levels of awareness of the 
usefulness of the Internet; and the availability (or lack thereof) of accessible content and 
services, in relevant languages and specific to the local context. Empowering users to 
engage safely online is essential: cyber -hygiene initiatives and user safety practices can 
boost confidence and reduce the likelihood of individuals withdrawing from the digital 
environment.  
 
Digital inclusion can only effectively be addressed with targeted, and longer -term 
engagement with the “unconnected”. Governments, internatio nal organisations, business 
enterprises, and others should collaborate to address both the barriers in access to, and 
usage of, connectivity. Local, sustainable and replicable initiatives such as ‘community 
networks’ should be supported and championed wher e applicable.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Reaffirm the role for all stakeholders in expanding meaningful connectivity, digital 
skills and access to locally -relevant digital content and services, addressing issues 
relating to both access and usage.  
● Call on govern ments and relevant stakeholders to create an enabling policy and 
regulatory environment for investment in increasing sustainable access to affordable 
connectivity, including to support technology and business models for last -mile 
connectivity.  
● Endorse the  Internet Universality Indicators developed by UNESCO.  
● Recognise and support the  International Telecommunication Union’s (ITU) role in 
providing technical assistance and capacity building of key institutions like telecoms 
regulators, its work on digital in clusion, and its work to provide a platform for 
stakeholders to coordinate and aggregate their efforts towards promoting meaningful 
connectivity (for example, through initiatives such as Partners2Connect).   
● Recognise the existence of country -specific  and global challenges in promoting 
meaningful connectivity, and focus the strategic remit of the UN system on the latter, 
while maintaining awareness of local perspectives.  
● Promote  best practices, building on existing work, clarifying the relationship with key 
fora (such as the World Summit on the Information Society ( WSIS )), and enhancing 
engagement with the industry and giving voice to local realities ( for example in 
relation to  community networks).  
  
 
9 Digital Public Goods and Digital Public Infrastructure  
Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) enables the effective provision of essential society -wide 
functions and services in the public and private sectors. Countries are increasingly turning to 
DPI to improve efficiency, speed, flexibility, inclusion and transparency of public and private 
sector functions and services. However, there are also associated risks as DPI can increase 
the capability for unlawful and arbitrary surveillance, w ith implications for privacy, democratic 
accountability, and the exclusion of vulnerable groups.  
 
If well designed and implemented, and complemented with support for the required enabling 
environment (i.e. regulatory, legal and policy environment, commitme nt to rule of law and 
human rights, and capability in digital skills), and approached as co -creation with civil 
society, private sector, public sector, academia and government, DPI is an important part of 
inclusive, responsible and sustainable digital tran sformation, This creates a robust 
foundation for more efficient and effective delivery of public and private sector services.  
 
Governments grappling with the design and implementation of new forms of DPI for public 
service delivery are increasingly encount ering similar chall enges and potential solutions. 
There is an opportunity for increased efforts to share approaches between governments, 
and particularly to promote investment in, and sharing of , Digital Public Goods (DPGs). 
DPGs take an open and interoper able approach to DPI, using open -source software, open 
data, open models, open standards, and open content that adhere to privacy and other 
applicable international laws and best practices.  
 
A DPG approach to DPI is an important means through which we can  accelerate digital 
development and burden -share - reducing duplication of effort, higher costs, whilst at the 
same time increasing interoperability.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Recognise the importance of in clusive and responsible DPI in supporting the 
achievement of the SDGs.  
● Recognise the need for appropriate safeguards and an enabling environment, to 
mitigate the potential privacy and inclusion risks related to DPI.  
● Encourage an open and interoperable approach to the development of DPI, including 
by promoting , where appropriate, Digital Public Goods. The Digital Public Goods 
Alliance may provide a useful reference point.  
8. A Responsible Approach to Data  
Protecting Data  
Data is the powerhouse of the digital economy, as well as changing  society for the better - 
creating jobs, and enabling us to tackle global challenges like climate change and the 
pandemic. The flow of data across borders is therefore crucial, creating a global environment 
where companies from all over the world can innov ate and grow, and where data improves 
life for all.  
 
At the same time, there is a pressing need to build individuals' trust that their personal data 
is being used and shared responsibly. Where data is not secured, or is otherwise 
mishandled, it can generat e threats to individual privacy. Human rights must be safeguarded 
to realise the opportunities offered by data: we must consider the rights of individuals along 
with the benefits of the collective.  
 
The UK is fully committed to championing the responsible  use and sharing of data globally, 
ensuring strong protections for individual privacy and personal data and recognising that 
 
10 nations will take different approaches to governing data. We are keen to work with 
international partners and multi -stakeholders to  implement robust protections for personal 
data, whilst enabling and encouraging data flows.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Champion the responsible use and sharing of data globally, recog nising the potential 
societal  and economic benefits of enabling responsible d ata use and data flows, as 
well as the potential of open data.  
● Recognise the potential for non -representative data sets to promote bias and 
contribute to inequalities; and call on all stakeholders to take all necessary steps to 
mitigate and minimise the ri sks by using high -quality data sets.  
● Encourage governments to promote the interoperability of their respective regimes to 
enable data flows across borders and limit data divides.  
● Reaffirm commitment from governments to ensuring policy and regulatory 
environments provide for a high level of protection for personal data and individual 
privacy, in line with human rights. This could include setting out high level principles 
guiding approaches to data protection at national and regional level, including 
commit ments to:  
○ Comply with obligations under international human rights law, in particular 
article 17 of the ICCPR.  
○ Put in place effective protections for data protection legislation or regulation, 
reflecting internationally recognised principles such as guid ance produced by 
the Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights and the OECD 
Declaration on Government Access to Personal Data Held in the Private 
Sector.  
○ Uphold best practices in relation to data protection requirements for business 
enterprises, in line with UN guiding principles on business and human rights.  
● Promote b est practices and encourage regulatory dialogue and cooperation between 
international Sup ervisory Authorities, as well as promote capacity building in contexts 
lacking existing, effective data protection regimes.  
● Build on the work of the UN Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PETs) Lab, 
encouraging further investment and collaboration on the devel opment of PETs to 
help tackle global challenges.  
● Facilitate dialogue with industry and civil society on innovative models , such as 
trusted data intermediaries, to support global data -sharing initiatives for sustainable 
development, in areas like climate ch ange or health.  
● Refrain from attempting to define a detailed normative framework or seeking to 
establish new UN institutions for this agenda.  
Data for Development  
 
The availability and responsible use of fit -for-purpose data is a critical enabl er to sustainable 
development. Access to high -quality data allows policy makers to improve the design, 
targeting, monitoring and provision of services. Development agencies c an use data to 
deliver, monitor  and evaluate effective programmes. The private sec tor uses data to inform 
investment and business decisions, powering economies. Individuals use data to hold 
governments to account.  
 
It is therefore essential that we support equitable access to the benefits of a modern data 
ecosystem, increasing the avail ability and accessibility of high -quality data. This means 
strengthening the data ecosystem broadly defined as the actors, infrastructure, governance 
 
11 and enablers - which come together to develop, validate, and use data2. The National 
Statistical system ha s traditionally led in the collection, processing and dissemination of 
official data. The organisation and governance of this system provides a foundation which 
can be expanded with new partners and actors to leverage the opportunity of the “Data 
Dividend”  of Digital Development and its application to accelerating progress in delivery of 
the SDGs. Stronger, more effective data systems drive diverse and far ranging economic, 
social, environmental and institutional benefits for individuals and communities.  
 
The Compact should:  
● Promote links between the  Digital and Data for Development Agenda.  
● Promote the development and sharing of best practices in building a modern data 
ecosystem, building on the role of National Statistical Systems, to enhance the 
collecti on, management and use of data for development  
● Promote support for equitable data partnerships. Developing the capacity and 
partnerships needed to mobilise the potential value of data, will drive catalytic and 
transformational progress to accelerate sustai nable development and democratic 
objectives.  
● Promote the Data for Development principles, founded upon value, trust and equity, 
building upon the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics and supporting a Fair 
Data Future.  
● Promote a human -rights base d approach to Data for Development – promoting and 
protecting human rights, with particular attention to vulnerable groups and 
individuals, and protecting personal data in line with international best practice, to 
prevent the misuse of data and engender pu blic trust in international data use and 
data-sharing.  
● Champion the potential of data for the public good and encourage actors to make 
data available in open, accessible, interoperable formats, for use by verified 
researchers and developers.  
● Pilot a data -sharing hub through the UN, through which good quality, interoperable 
datasets could be made available to verified researchers and academics, to drive 
progress towards the SDGs, in partnership with industry stakeholders.  
9. Building an Inclusive Online World  
User safety online  
 
The Internet and social media platforms enable information to spread globally at a previously 
unimaginable pace, and scale. This has unarguably diversified and democratised public 
discourse – providing  a platform to those whose voices w ere not previously heard through 
traditional media to have global reach.  
 
The possibility for online anonymity – much  like the pseudonym of the printed press - has 
also opened up new channels for expression and exploration of individuals’ identities and 
views. Whether in authoritarian contexts, or within repressive communities and domestic 
environments, tools for online anonymity have enabled access to information and expression 
without fear of reprisals. Intermediary immunity from liability - the principl e by which 
platforms hosting user generated content should not be held legally liable for content posted 
by third parties - has underpinned these freedoms.  
  
However, we are concerned that the promise of an inclusive, diverse online environment is 
increasingly being undermined by the prevalence of abusive conduct, targeted harassment, 
                                                
2 World Bank Development report 2021: Data for Better Lives  
 
12 and acts of violence perpetrated online. This trend has a chilling effect on individuals’ 
expression online, and active participation in economic, social and cultural life. It 
disproportionately impacts women and girls, particularly those who belong to racial and 
ethnic minorities, religion or belief minorities, women in public lif e including journalists, 
politicians, and others. Other minorities, in particular those subject to intersecting or multiple 
forms of discrimination, are also disproportionately impacted. At its most severe, hate 
speech online, and such content and conduct , can constitute incitemen t to hostility, 
discrimination and violence.  
 
These negative trends are a reflection of our offline world. As such, any effective response to 
these challenges must be informed by an interdisciplinary approach, and encourage a 
whole -of-society response, including efforts in the offline world to tackle root causes.  
 
The Compact should:  
 
● Set an aspiration for what an inclusive, free, diverse, accessible online world would 
look like, and promote practical actions for all stakeholders to take in building it.  
● Promote a whole -of-society, multidisciplinary approach to addressing user safety 
issues.  
● Reinforce the net positive impact of the Internet and platforms in enabling the 
enjoyment of human rights online and offline, in particular t he freedom to seek, 
receive and impart inf ormation and ideas of all kinds.  
● Reinforce that States’ responses - including legislation, regulation, and policy action - 
to issues such as mis and disinformation, as well as abusive conduct and online 
harassment,  must be compliant with States’ obligations under international human 
rights law, in particular freedom of expression. This could include highlighting 
concerns with responses that violate those obligations, including for example 
shutdowns or interferences in connectivity; government censorship; overbroad 
takedown/notice regimes; criminal law sanctions for mis/disinformation.  
● Reiterate business enterprises responsibility to respect human rights  
● Promote research to build an evidence base of the key trends gl obally, regionally, 
nationally, and locally, and of effective policy interventions that tackle them, whilst 
respecting human rights.  
● Promote constructive dialogue between Member States, large platforms, civil society, 
including user groups and human rights  groups, to share and develop best practices. 
Engaging and empowering youth participation in the co -creation and design of 
measures, is particularly important.  
● Promote greater transparency standards by online platforms in relation to their 
content moderati on practices, including access to disaggregated data on the 
prevalence and response to certain forms of content and conduct.  
● Encourage investment in digital skills, critical thinking, and media literacy, at every 
age. 
● Encourage a safety -by-design approach , which embeds safety into the 
conceptualization, development and implementation of digital technologies and 
related policies.  
● Promote voluntary pledges from business enterprises to undertake a safety -by-
design and human -rights -by-design approach to their  products and services, enable 
informed user choice, and provide users with the tools to curate their own online 
experience.  
● Recognise the importance of online pseudonymity and anonymity, to enable freedom 
of expression.  
● Promote efforts to give children and young people the tools they need to navigate the 
online world – including  digital and media literacy skills, competencies for positive 
engagement on digital technologies.  
 
13 ● Promote whole -of-society approaches to tackling  hate speech, abuse, and 
harassment online, and gender -based violence that occurs through or is amplified by 
the use of technology, addressing root causes and promoting gender equality. This 
could include promoting investment in programmes to tackle the ro ot causes of 
online abuse, harassment, and intolerance, including equality and non -discrimination 
initiatives.  
● Support inclusive and responsible access to digital content and services for people 
living with disabilities.  
Mis and Disinformation  
 
The UK  recognise s the challenge relating to the use of the Internet and platforms to spread 
mis and disinformation. This can have the effect of undermining the population’s access to 
accurate information, which is particularly dangerous in times of crisis, public he alth 
emergencies, and in the context of elections or other moments of democratic importance.  
 
We note that the spread of mis and disinformation can be accelerated by platform design, 
including through recommender systems that amplify polarising content,  and where such 
content can be reshared frictionlessly with an audience beyond a user’s immediate followers. 
We believe further transparency from platforms about their systems and processes, 
alongside preventative safety -by-design approaches, would help to  mitigate these risks.  
 
 The Compact should:  
● Set an aspiration for what a vibrant information ecosystem would look like, and 
emphasise the role of all stakeholders in building it.  
● Promote constructive dialogue between Member States, relevant platforms, ci vil 
society, including user groups and human rights groups, to share and develop best 
practices, reinforcing the need for responses to mis/disinformation to comply with 
international human rights law and ensuring in particular, the protection of freedom of  
expression.  
● Reinforce commitments to a free, independent, diverse, pluralistic media landscape 
and opposing measures that  interfere with media and journalists’ ability to operate 
freely.  
● Promote multi -stakeholder, multidisciplinary responses to mis/dis information, which 
focus on building user skills and resilience to mis/disinformation rather than 
exclusively on restricting online content.  
● Promote efforts to build the evidence base to drive industry and platform -specific best 
practice - improving understanding of the effectiveness of a range of platform counter 
disinformation interventions and products, from fact check labels to researcher data -
sharing regimes.  
● Encourage platforms to proactively consider the risks of mis/disinformation in the 
desig n, development and implementation of their products and services (including 
the role of algorithms in amplifying mis/disinformation) and enhance transparency 
around their terms of service and content moderation policies.  
● Encourage platforms to provide use rs with greater control over their online 
experiences and with clear and appropriate mechanisms for user redress, alongside 
appropriate protections for journalists and recognised news publishers.  
 
 
 
14 10. Artificial Intelligence  
Cutting -edge technologies such as Artificial Intelligence ( AI) have transformational potential. 
Already, AI is delivering tangible benefits: speeding up medical research and diagnostics, 
and generating productivity savings in the public and private sectors. AI’s potential 
applications in f ields like climate science can improve our understanding of future risks, and 
improve our response to the threat of climate change, and other shared challenges. As such, 
creating an enabling environment for innovation in the design, development, and deploy ment 
of these technologies is a societal imperative.  
 
Innovation should, however, be responsible: it is essential that the right safeguards are in 
place for human rights, security, sustainability, and broader democratic values. This 
approach builds public  trust, business confidence and will ultimately support the widespread 
adoption of these powerful technologies. With potential dual use applications, it is important 
that the specific use context is taken into consideration when managing potential risks.  
 
In relation to AI, the UK’s AI Regulation White Paper  sets out our intention to work through 
existing regulators, who will refer to a set of five core principles3 to guide their industry 
oversight.  These principles build on the OECD’s AI Principles , which form the basis of many 
emerging international AI governance initiatives. The UK  will con sult on new processes to 
enable coordination between regulators, and implement six central functions to support the 
UK’s AI regulation framework and provide an overarching view of how it operates and where 
improvements are needed. This includes a horizon s canning function and a central risk 
function which will enable the government to monitor and identify emerging risks and 
opportunities. This flexible, iterative approach ensures we can be responsive to the rapid 
pace of technological change.  
 
The Compact should:  
 
● Champion the transformative potential of emerging technologies, such as AI, 
including for the achievement of the SDGs, and to drive sustainable growth.  
● Set a positive, aspirational vision for the future, in which the use of AI systems  
improves o ur lives for the better, and where everyone can reap the benefits they 
have to offer.   
● Reaffirm State obligations to protect, respect, and fulfil human rights, including in the 
context of the use of new technologies such as AI; and business enterprises’ 
responsibilities to respect human rights throughout their business operations.  
● Encourage capacity building and investment in relevant skills and training, with 
particular emphasis on promoting access to training and education for those currently 
under -represented in STEM, including women and girls, and minority groups, and 
those subject to multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination.  
● Champion a secure -by-design approach to new technologies and data sharing 
systems, to promote safety and predictabilit y.  
                                                
3safety, security and robustness:  applications of AI should function in a secure, safe and robust way 
where risks are carefully managed  
transparency and explainability : organisations developing and deploying AI should be able to 
communicate when and how it is used and explain a system’s d ecision -making process in an appropriate 
level of detail that matches the risks posed by the use of AI  
fairness : AI should be used in a way which complies with the UK’s existing laws, for example the 
Equality Act 2010 or UK GDPR, and must not discriminate against individuals or create unfair 
commercial outcomes  
accountability and governance : measures are needed to ensure there is appropriate oversight of the 
way AI is being used and clear accountability for the outcomes  
contestability and redress : people ne ed to have clear routes to dispute harmful outcomes or decisions 
generated by AI  
 
15 ● Emphasise the importance of an  enabling environment for responsible innovation, 
including proportionate, and transparent policy and regulation.  
● Consider existing principles, such as the OECD AI Principles, and the UK ’s AI 
principles (focused on safety,  security and robustness; transparency and 
explainability; fairness; accountability and governance; contestability and redress ) as 
a possible reference point in the Compact debate.  
● Promote efforts to share best practices and knowledge, including in relation to 
practical assurance tools and techniques that can help measure, evaluate and 
communicate the trustworthiness of AI systems across the development and 
deployment life cycle. Thi s will enable organisations to determine whether 
technologies are aligned with regulatory requirements, and protect human rights.  
● Promote a proportionate, risk -based approach to AI governance, with a focus on 
managing risk in the specific contexts in whic h it is applied. Particular emphasis 
should be placed on addressing risks of bias and discriminatory impacts associated 
with the use of new technologies.  
● Exclude issues relating to  Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems – currently under 
consideration within t he UN Group of Governmental Experts – from the scope of the 
Compact.  
11. Cyber Security  
 
We recognise that cyber threats present serious policy challenges in all jurisdictions. We are 
clear however that existing  UN processes lead efforts to address these and  should continue 
to do so. These include the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive International 
Convention on Countering the Use of ICTs for Criminal Purposes , and the Open -Ended 
Working Group on Security of and in the use of ICTs, and in future t he proposed Programme 
of Action to advance responsible state behaviour in the use of ICTs in the context of 
international security .  
 
The Compact should:  
 
● Avoid  duplication  within the UN system, excluding issues related to cyber  security  
from the scope of  the Compact.  
 
 
 