1 
  
 
 
Our Common Agenda: Global  Digital Compa ct  
 
Statement of Priorities  (revised)   
202 3 
 
The U.S. Council for International Business (USCIB) believe s that digital technologies and the online 
environment enabled by them present an unprecedented opportunity  to grow th e glob al economy , bridge 
inequalities through access to info rmation and opportunity  by raising productivity, foster  creativity and 
innovation, build  trust , and e xpand  soci etal engagement and exchange . USCIB therefore applauds the UN 
Secretary G eneral’s inclusion of the proposed Global Digital Compact  (GDC) as part  of Our Common Agenda.   
 
Key to realizin g the developmental benefits of digital transformation are policies that support an enabling 
environment  for technology innovation . Such policies  may addres s economic, social/cultural, technical, and 
governance issue s, all of which are interlinked and cross -cutting. This  holistic approach best ensures the 
development of an open, safe, highly secure, stable, interoperable, seamless , and sustainable digital 
ecosystem with the potential to close development gaps  and addr ess other inequities . In short, this is how 
the suggested GDC object ives  can be achieved . 
 
USCIB regards the following issues as ke y to realiz ing improved digital cooperation:  
 
Infrastr ucture, Con nectivity, and Spectrum  – Access to connectivity is an imperative to the achievement of 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The be nefits of digita l transformation and the GDC ’s proposed  
aspiration to connect all people to the Internet, i ncluding all schools  can only be realized if there is 
adequate broadband infrastructure and spectrum .  In its most recent official statistics , the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) found that more than 2.9 billion people are not using the Internet,  96% of 
who m live in developing countries.1  
 
Lack of affordable financing is a critica l inhibitor to the growth of Internet Service Providers (ISPs ) in 
developing countries. If we are to  succeed in connecting the unconnected , it is critical that International 
Financial Institutions as well as  developed and developing countries alike do more to incentivize new 
financing models, included blended finance and  multistakeholder partnerships,  to support the build -out of 
broadband in frastructure as well as wireless devices and other related aspects of a rapidly evolving digital 
ecosystem.   
 
For connectivity  to be people -centered  and meaningful,  we need  to go beyo nd universal  access . We support  
the Roundtable  on Global  Connectivity’s  base line and targets  for meaning ful connectivity  as well  as the 
inclusion  of five connectivity  enablers,  including  infrastructure,  affordability , skills,  devices,  and safety  and 
securi ty. 
 
In addition, the availability of licensed spectrum for  exclusive use an d shared use as well as unlicensed use 
has an important and complementary role in promoting the accessibility of t he Internet and its 
developmental potential. There are many import ant uses of spectrum, including broadcast and mobile 
broadb and as well as fo r Wi -Fi. Effective and technologically neutral management of this increasingly scare 
 
1  2021  edition  of Facts  and Figures , https://www.itu.int/itu -d/reports/statistics/fac ts-figures -2021/  

2 
 resource must be a priority f or UN members while ensuring the integrity of services offered by existing 
spectrum license holders.   
 
Multistakeholder Gover nance Approaches  -- The global digital ecosystem benefits when government 
policymakers work in close cooperation with business , civil society , academia, and the technical 
community . Giv en the rapi d pace of technological change, governments need the per spec tives provide d by 
these stakeholder groups to better understand what policies are commercially viable, technically feasible, 
and o ffer adequate personal privacy protections. Such stakeh older inclu sion also can lower the risk of 
unintended consequences and increase the leg itimacy of policies  that are adopted . The UN h as been at the 
forefront of establishing a multistakeholder approach as the norm.2 As such, the GDC should reinforce this 
principle an d actors should endeavor to carry out multistakeholder processes for Interne t governance, 
while not duplicating existin g forums  and instead leveraging and strengthening  existing forums and 
workstreams. The GDC can also serve as a centralized med ium for wor kstreams related to digital 
devel opment and inclusion.  
 
Avoid  Internet Fragment ation – The remarkable success of the Internet as a communications tool is 
grounded in its design as an  open, interconnected , and interoperable network . Particularly  in support  of 
achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), we must promote this design. However,  various 
technical, legislative , and policy developments  - including restrictions on da ta flows, interference with free 
expression , techno -protection ist initiat ives,  and Internet shutdowns - have in recent y ears caused the 
Internet to fragment  and digital divides to grow . Whether taking place at the technical, network , or 
application layers of the Internet , this fragme ntation is undermin ing the open, i nterconnect ed, and 
interoperable Intern et and consequently undermining the associated b enefits to social and economic 
developme nt as well as harming human rights.  
 
We therefore warmly welcome the Secretary -General’s propo sal to have Internet fragmentation  included  
as pa rt of the GDC . The GDC shou ld call for harmonization in global approaches to Internet governance that 
promote free flows of data, encryption, and rig hts to freedom of expression and privacy online.  We note 
that the Internet Governance Forum has recentl y establish ed a Policy Network3 to explore these issues, 
which should provide helpful input as to how these issues can be understood and a ddressed.  Further 
unders coring the urgency to address Internet f ragmen tation, w e note that USCIB has endors ed principl es 
to he lp prote ct and open, inter connected, and interoperable Internet .4 
 
Free Flow of Data  Across Borders  – USCIB  embraces the view that the free flow of data and information is 
critical for economic reco very  and growth , as well as  advancemen t of the SDGs . Policies that facilitate the 
adoption of new technol ogie s and the global movement of data and information will enable all cit izens and 
companies to realize the full potential of the Internet as a platform for innovation, economic growth, and  
gender equality. Digital technologies can pro vide women with tools  to feel more secure, access education  
and healthcare , and obtain financi al resources . 
 
The proliferation of government -mandated  requirements to process or store data locally, us e or develo p 
technology locally, use local content or com ply with specif ic technical requirements  serve as onerous 
barriers to cross -border flows of da ta. Such localization requirements – as well as di fferences in domestic 
approaches – hurt domestic econom ies and jeo pardize the very privacy and security they aim to safeguard.  
 
 
2  The UN -sponsored Wo rld Summit on the Information Soc iety in 2003 and 2005 set the foundation for a multistakeholder 
appro ach to the  governance of ICTs.  
3 https ://www.intgovforum.or g/en/content/policy -network -on-internet -fragmentation   
4 https://www.gp -digital.org/an -open -interconn ected -and-interoperabl e-internet -joint -letter/  
3 
 The GDC should encourage collaboration on the interoperability of frameworks to promote the flow of data 
and explicitly oppose restrictions on data flows, while upholding privacy  stan dards, reco gnizing the 
ongoing evidence -based work by  the OECD on the topic .5 
 
Indeed, in line with Our Common Agenda’s  call to establish a Digital Commons as a global public good , it 
would be val uable to look at the societal benefits that can be accr ued f rom open da ta – finding ways to 
share and collaborate  around data to make decis ions, improve efficiency, foster scientific discover y and 
innovation, and tackle some of the world’s most pressing societal challenges , including fights COVID -19. 
The GDC could also offer definition and clarity into the notion of a “global digital commons ” and what it 
exactly entails.  
 
Another way in which the GDC could help build a Digital Commons i s to provide backing for the concept of 
Digital Public Goods, as promoted in the Secretar y-General’s  2020 Roadmap for Digital Cooperation. Digital 
Public Goods (DPGs) are open -source software, open d ata, open AI models, open standards, or open 
content that  adhere to the  standard6 developed by the Digital Public Goods Alliance . One of the DPG 
stan dard’s indicat ors is relevance to the Sustainable Development Goals  (SDG s), and DPGs can be seen as a 
tool to accelerate achievement of the Agenda for Sustainable D evelopment.  
 
Complem enting this USCIB encourages the GDC to consider the OECD Re commendatio n on Enhancing 
Access to and Sharing of Data to maximize the benefits of data while protecting the rights o f individuals and 
organizations.7 
 
Importance of Trust  and Security  – By the same token, U.S. business realizes that  the benefits of digit al 
transformat ion enable d by data flows will only be realized and embraced by consumers, businesses, and 
governments who trust the  online environment and fe el confident that the privacy of  their perso nal data 
will be respected and tha t their online systems  are secure. We ag ree wi th the GDC ’s call for data protection . 
Business remain s committed to complying with applica ble privacy regulations and recognize s its 
responsibility to adopt best p ractices to ensure that personal data and information is appropriate ly secure 
as techn ology and serv ices evolve.  
 
We further recognize tha t a risk-based , voluntary  approach to online security , which leverages 
international standards such as th ose adopted by the  ISO, is essential to ensur ing a secure, stable, and 
resilient Internet ecosy stem . We b elieve that trust in the online e nvir onment is best achieved thro ugh 
privacy and security protections that do not unnecessarily restrict  the free flow of data across internati onal 
boundaries  and are globa lly interoperable . Stakehold ers should ens ure that s ecurity principles do not 
promote fragmentation. In addition, the  work should not duplicate or conflict with ongoing workstreams in 
the UN , including but not limited to  the Ope n Ended Working Group on C ybersecurity  (OEWG ) 2021 -2025 
and th e Ad Hoc  Committee on Cybercrime . These various UN wo rkstreams have recognized  cybersecurity 
as essential to international security and th e securit y of users  onlin e, as have o ngoing efforts by companies 
to curb the harms from  bad actors  in cyberspace.  We welcome the link between digital  trust and security in 
the Secretary -General ’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation , and look forward to further  consultations with 
companies in deve loping and deploy ing ICT further in a t rustwor thy manner  alongside the UN thro ugh 
multis takeholder processes  and partnerships.  
 
 
5 https://goingdigital.oecd .org/dat a/notes/No21_ToolkitNote_PrivacyDataInteroperability.pdf . In additio n, 
https:/ /www.oecd.or g/digital/ieconomy/privacy.htm  
6 https://digitalpublicgoods.net/standard/  
7 https: //legalinstruments.oe cd.org/e n/instruments/OECD -LEGAL -0463  
4 
 Online Safe ty and Well -being  in the Di gital Age  - Fostering trust also involve s ensuring a safe and 
empowering  online experience.  USCIB recognizes the shared challenge of e mbedding  safety onlin e and 
encourag ing multi stakeholder coope ration to help individuals, es pecially youth a nd vulnerable groups, 
make h ealthy decisions online, stay safe , buil d resilience , and thrive in the digital w orld . This includes  not 
only  committing to privacy and safety -by-design  but ensuring digital experiences e nable children to grow 
constructively  and d evelop 21st century ski lls like creativity, problem solving and cri tical thinking.  
 
The protectio n of users ’ – and thus human – rights is core to the UN ’s mission, and cor e to protecting the 
safety of users on line. The GDC should  also na me the  shar ed responsibility of governments to e nable open,  
public discourse online and refrain f rom censoring speec h, as well as ensuring co nnectivity and access to 
the Internet and digital pla tforms and products. This framewor k can advance  the goals outl ined in the 
Secretary -General ’s Roadm ap on  Digital Coop eration  in relati on to digital human righ ts and enable further 
discuss ion aro und guidance and ga ps. 
 
We encourage innovative ap proaches, such as the application of Artificial Intelligence (AI), to help  enhanc e 
efforts to address harmful content. We urge the GDC to consider  existing recommendation s such as the 
OECD Recommendation of the Council o n Children in the Digital Env ironmen t, which was also recognized 
by the 2021  G20 and in the 2021 G7 Internet Safety Principl es.8 It should also build on the wor k of the UN 
system such as UNICEF’s programs on Ch ild Rights in the Digital Age9 and Responsibl e Innovation in 
Technology fo r Children10 as well as  and the ITU’s work on Child Online Protection.11  
 
In promoting  better onli ne environments, the GDC should reco gnize th e importance of adopting a  holistic 
approach that inc orporates safety  alongside  individ ual rights and  a person ’s overall well -being , 
acknowledging  the fact that it is better to manage risks  and create opportu nities for expression, growth and 
develo pment rather than mandate  sterile digital spaces.  This includes educating and equipping individuals 
with digital skills and  literacy, so use rs are empowered t o make informed ch oices online , navigate risk , and 
discern mis - and disinformation.  
 
Open Market s and Predictabl e Regulatory Environments  – The availa bility of d igital technology and online 
services to an ever -increasing  percentage of th e world’s population requires that  governments open their 
markets to competitive ICT and application providers and foreign investme nt.  UN m embers should 
support the  adoption of pr edictable, rules -based regulatory environments that will re sult in a full ra nge of 
competitive providers suppl ying services to markets that are currently unders erved.  We urge that this 
elemen t be included in  the GD C. 
 
Protection of Human Rights Online -- With the a dven t of the Internet and digital transfo rmation o f the 
economy, U.S. business has sought op portunities to work with governments, regulators, non-governmental 
organizations,  and others to m eet the challenges posed by new tec hnologies and to help ensure tha t the 
Internet is used to foster an excha nge of id eas. We are strongly committed to human ri ghts, including the 
right to free dom of expression , in line with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.  The 
UN has a track record of engagi ng the private sector on these issues, including through t he Business and 
Human  Rights in Technology (B -Tech) initiative.12 As the leading UN entity on human rights, the OHCHR  
plays a key role as a co nvener and thought leader.   
 
8 OECD, Recommendation o f the Co uncil on Children in the Digital Environment, 2021.  
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org /en/instruments/OECD -LEGAL -0389 
9 UNICEF, Child R ights in the Digital Age. https:/ /www.unicef -irc.org/research/child -rights -in-the-digital -age/  
10 UNI CEF, Child Rights in the Digital Age. http s://www.unicef -irc.org/research/child -rights -in-the-digital -age/; UNICEF, 
Responsible Innovation in Technology for Children . http s://www.unicef -irc.org/ri tec 
11 ITU, Guideline s on Child O nline Protection, 2020. https://www.itu -cop-guidelines.com/   
12 OHCHR,  B-Tech Proje ct, https://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/B usiness/Pages/B -TechProject.aspx   
5 
  
It is therefore welcome that  the Secretary -Gen eral has proposed that the GDC should recogni ze the need to 
apply human rights online as one would apply those huma n rig hts offline . Furthermore, USCIB would like 
to underscore the  importance of transparent, multistakeholder dialogues to advance the goals outlined in 
the S ecretary General ’s Roadmap on Digital Human Rights, such as addressing protection gaps, 
discouragi ng In ternet shut downs, an d providing more detailed guidance on th e application of human rights 
standards in the digital  age.13 
 
Importance of  Artificial Intelligence (AI) – USC IB recognizes the potential  of AI to address economic, 
societal, and environmenta l inequ alities. Indeed, we regard AI technologies as computationa l intelligence 
that can help subject matter experts to mak e advances in ever y sector, enabling innovation and highly 
beneficial applicati ons in healthcare, agriculture, education, manufacturi ng, and  transpor tation, among 
other areas. AI and other virtual/a ugmented reality technologies  are just at the beginning of  commercial 
deploy ment and will continue to evolve a nd develop.   
 
We believe that existing  regulation s are sufficient for these servi ces and t hat any  new requirements  should 
be carefully c onsidered in consultation with stakeholders  to ensure they are narro wly tailored to ad dress 
specific concerns as they ar ise. Consequently, we do not believe that the GDC  should get involved in the 
deve lopment of  regul ation of  AI.  Premature and overly expansive reg ulatory activity could have 
unforeseen consequences  that wo uld stunt the grow th of these emerging technologies and the benefits 
consumers could enjoy from their contin ued development.  Rather, it is essential that all stakeholders work 
together to shape the  development of AI to foster trust and broad adopti on.  Thi s includ es educati ng people 
about AI’s potential for  societal good , addressing worries about job dislocation , and reskilling workers so 
they can stay  ahead of the technological curve and seize the benefits of AI transformation.   
 
Imp orta ntly, he GDC shoul d not duplicate exis ting workstreams, such as the OECD ’s AI Principles,14 rather 
they should build on their progress to establish consis tent internation al positions that support effective 
self-regulat ion. While regulation is important, it should be risk -based and should not be prescriptive . 
 
Introducing Accountability  Criteria for Discrimina tory and Misleading Content  – USCIB encourage s the GDC  
to consider ongoing efforts and investments by many US companies to strengthen transparency and 
reporting around ho w they address discriminatory  and misleading content online , and to no t dup licate 
existing  and ongoing workstreams for co -regulatio n and self -regulation.  
 
 
 
 
 
13 https://www.un .org/en/conte nt/digital -cooperation -roadma p/  
14 OECD, Princip les on AI, 2019. http s://oecd.ai/en/ai -principles   