 
 
 
1 
 Emmanuelle Duquenne  – Policy advisor  – Digital Future Foundation  
 CONTRIBUTION TO THE GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
1. GENERAL COMMENTS  
The Global Digital Compact  should represent important steps towards achieving the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals .  
As the Global Digital Compact will be implemented ultimately by private sector, civil society, technical 
community and governments , a multistakeholder and contributors group  should be involved  throughout 
the entire process  and in its d rafting , beyond the cons ultation phase.  
Consistency with existing initiatives , principles and regulations is key to ensure the effectiveness of a 
global regulatory framework . It also requires an inclusive, dynamic and agile adoption process  to adapt 
to the fast -paced evolution of emerging technologies  and related key issues.  
As shown in a recent report of the McKinsey Global Institute “ Securing Europe’s competitiveness: 
Addressing its technology gap ”, Europe needs to raise its investment in  tech R&D if it wants to compete 
with other global leaders in transversal technologies, ranging from future  of connectivity  to next -
generation computing or applied AI.  On the other hand , next -generation innovators  have the ability to 
solve global issues  in various areas  according to the predictions of the Technology Pioneers recognized 
by the World Economic Forum . 
Just as  mobile technology has been a game changer  during the last 15 years, blockchain will 
democratize and streamline access to credit . There is a clear correlation  between GDP per capita  and 
cell phone penetration . In the developing countries, t he biggest driver of th is growth is mobile money . 
People who  have never had a bank account or a secure way to save, transfer, borrow and invest money 
now have  it all at hand.   
With the  rise of digital labour marketplaces, “gig-work ” and “job on demand”  will offer earning 
opportunities in countries where jobs  are scarce  for low -skilled populations . The best opportunities will 
be given to the best talent wherever  they live , thereby truly unl eashing  the potential of a billion knowledge 
workers.  A data -first approach in the way we do business and close  agreements  will enable  massive 
efficiency gains and free up vast  amount of wasted human potential that could  be redirected to more 
meaningful objectives . 
Smart contracts have the potential to revolutionize e -commerce and the exchange of goods , forever 
changing the  way we trade and consum e, with application evolving towards  open marketplace for 
literally every thing, where anyone can share the value they create.  
Ed-tech will profoundly transform our education models . The web is already interfacing  children with 
the best experts, progressing  the quality of education and reducing inequalities in a cost -effective way. 
In the future, technological progress will help  every child to develop skills meet ing their deepest 
aspirations to build a better world. AI will serve as world -class education counsellor, understanding 
every child ’s own interests  and suggesting tailored learning journeys and insights for their parents and 
teachers.  
Quantum networks and qu antum encryption  will ensure  secure communications leverage the power of 
physics to enable unhackable security. Ultimately , distributed quantum computing will enable the 
quantum internet , which power of calculation will exponentially accelerate cycles of inn ovation when it 
comes to discover new medicines or new sustainable materials. As one of the most pressing issue is 
to enhance trust in digital technologies , this will help combat all forms of cybercrime and illegal cyber 
activities online, which are one of  the root cause of distrust in digital technologies and Internet 
fragmentation.  
Furthermore, d igital transformation is crucial  to fight climate change and ensure the energy transition . 
Countless evidence -based studies show that countries developing and scaling more tech nologies  are 
also the most developed and sustainable in the world.  
 
 
 
2 
 Emmanuelle Duquenne  – Policy advisor  – Digital Future Foundation  
 While  3D-printed homes  are going mainstream, how we build future cities  will exponentially accelerate  
our sustainability efforts . The construction industry, that accounts for almost 40% of global CO2 
emissions, is adopting  new sustainable mat erials and battery energy storage systems  tailored for 
construction sites that reduce carbon emissions by 80%.  
Beyond solar farms’  projects and off-grid renewable energy , future flexible energy grid  will be able to 
balance in real time energy supply and demand, allowing individual renewable energy producers to 
reinject energy in the network, optimizing their earnings and energy  consumption. Electric vehicles will 
respond to real -time grid requirements, when it need s the most.  
In the area of CO2 capture, n ew data sources as remote sensing data streams from high -resolution 
cameras and lasers (i.e., LiDAR), satellites, smartphon e sensors or position ing systems combined with 
cloud data processing, artificial intelligence and data fusion will empower accurate measurement and 
monitoring of plant health and carbon sequestration potential for natural ecosystems . 
The examples of potentially disruptive and lifechanging future technologies could go on and on , as far 
as innovation is critical to the future well -being of society and to driving economic growth . Nevertheless, 
the main issues facing  the world  in the areas of connectivity , internet fragmentation, data protection, 
human rights online , disinformation, artificial intelligence and digital commons require international 
dialogue and cooperation  to achieve an open, free and secure digital future for all . 
This contribution build on  public position  of other  stakeholders in an  attempt to synthesize and find 
common positions  on the principles and commitments expected from the Global Digital Compact.  
2. CONNECT ALL PEOPLE TO THE INTERNET, INCLUDING ALL SCHOOLS  
Core principles  
Achieving universal connectivity is crucial for an inclusive digital economy and to accelerate progress 
towards the  17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals  (SDGs), including  SDGs on education, 
resilient infrastructure, inclusive and sustainable industrialization and innovation. As it impacts various 
aspects  of life, including work, learning and accessing basic services, digital transformation enables 
countless economic opportunities for all people across the world, helping to eradicate extreme poverty, 
improving health  and well -being  as well as  inclusive and  sustainable economic growth . 
To harness the  economic opportunities , governments, international organizations, and the private 
sector should build on physical resources and infrastructures, focusing on digital skills, technology and 
competitiveness.  
Whethe r it is about infrastructure and devices, applications and services, or skills, policymaking should 
be based on promoting the value of the entire communications and digital services ecosystem and 
fostering competition and innovation through  non-discriminat ory, technology -neutral, and supportive 
of innovative business models . Innovative and sustainable business models can address the challenge 
of providing broadband connectivity to underserved areas. Emerging markets possess vibrant 
economies and entrepreneurial energy, making them ideal for future innovation with the right policy 
frameworks , focusing on competitiveness . 
The Declaration on the Future of the Internet highlights key principles, such as inclusive and reliable 
access, digital literacy and skill development, and fostering cultural diversity and social inclusion. These 
principles aim to close the digital divide and enable individuals to safely participate in the digital 
economy.  
Bridging  the digital divide  with a focus on equity and en suring access to the digital sphere for all , 
particularly women, young persons and  those with disabilities, in both rural and urban areas  should 
result in affordable, inclusive, secure, and stable  access via trusted networks  to the open Internet . 
 
 
 
3 
 Emmanuelle Duquenne  – Policy advisor  – Digital Future Foundation  
 The digital transformation of education  can provide unique opportunities for inclusive and equitable 
quality education, but global digital divides, including the gender digital divide, must be overcome.  
Connecting every school to the internet and extending services to households and individuals can 
provide additional avenues for education and lifelong learning . Digital skills are essential for internet 
access and should be acquired by all individuals, sta rting from elementary school and continuing 
throughout their lives. Preventing and countering online threats , such as violence and harassment, as 
well as promoting cybersecurity awareness , are crucial aspects of the digital skills of the future .  
Key commi tments  
The Global Digital Compact should reaffirm member states' commitment to bridging coverage and 
usage gaps, recognizing stakeholders' efforts and promoting flexible, forward -looking policy and 
regulatory approaches grounded in evidence and data.  
Considering the complexities of delivering global connectivity, t he Global Digital Compact should 
promote evidence -based, transparent,  adaptable and non -discriminatory policymaking and regulation  
that foster the deployment of secure and trusted digital net works , facilitate and maximise the impact of 
public and private investment, foster innovation across the digital value chain , and promote digital 
literacy and skills development.  
Ensuring access to excellent connectivity for everyone  relies on a combination of private investments 
and public funding instruments. Investments in digital infrastructure, particularly in rural and outermost 
regions, are crucial, with significant support for 5G and fiber networks.  Both private investments and 
public fund ing should be guided by accurate information , including coverage and usage data, satellite 
images, and census data to make informed decisions on network deployment . 
To ensure competitive and regulatory environment that fosters trust in electronic communica tion 
services and reduces the digital divide, industry leaders, stakeholders, and policymakers must engage 
in dialogue and establish the right incentives for digital infrastructure investment . 
Emphasis should also be placed on efficient, transparent and fair  spectrum  allocation and licensing  
for broadband -capable networks . Unlicensed, shared, and secondary uses must be encouraged while 
incentivizing operators to use the spectrum efficiently. For  remote and rural areas, policies should aim 
to reduce deployment costs by easing licensing processes, providing access to sufficient spectrum, and 
supporting alternative technology approaches. Non-discriminatory regulatory frameworks for low -cost 
licensed  spectrum  access  should f ocus on lower frequency bands for better coverage, and promot e 
greater access to unlicensed spectrum in unserved or underserved areas.  
The Global Digital Compact  should promote access to affordable, stable, open, accessible, safe, secure, 
and high -speed internet for higher education, including connecting schools.  It should commit to 
promoting digital skills and lifelong learning  and supporting digital connectivity , infrastructure, and 
tools in education and training institutions. Learners and teachers  must be enabled to acquire and share 
digital skills and competences, with opportunities for up -skilling and re -skilling.  
3. AVOID INTERNET FRAGMENTATION  
Core principles  
The open, interconnected, and interoperable Internet, initially designed as a shared resource , is 
increasingly at risk due to unintended consequences of technical, legislative, regulatory, and policy 
developments that threaten its unity and accessibility.  
These risks occur at the technical, legislative, regulatory, and policy levels . Key threats include 
government -imposed internet shutdowns, cybercrime, low cybersecurity standards, and policies that 
control internet access or conduct public surveillance. Technical fragmentation at backbone layer, 
network/access layer, and application/content layer  also threatens the global internet's interoperability.  
 
 
 
4 
 Emmanuelle Duquenne  – Policy advisor  – Digital Future Foundation  
 This fragmentations affects users ' access to information, privacy protections, and freedom to transact 
and communicate based on their location. It hinders international trade , particularly impacting small 
businesses and emerging markets .  
Restrictions on the free flow of information and ideas  have been imposed by governments.  Internet 
must be open, interconnected, stable, secure and interoperable . Restrictions of and on the Internet 
threaten global and open cyberspace, as well as the rule of law, human rights and democracy. Net 
neutrality  is another  key issue that must be maintained and protected.  
To address these concerns, a multistakeholder, bott om-up, distributed and transparent governance 
model of Internet must be preserved , and strengthen to address Internet -related issues and promote 
cooperation among organizations. This model should be guided by information sharing, raising 
awareness, and collaboration . Governments, businesses, technical communities, acade mia, and civil 
society must be involved in discussions and decision -making, ensuring diverse, equitable, and inclusive 
policymaking processes , and supporting the meaningful participation of under -represented groups. The 
strength of this governance model lie s in its open and inclusive participation, legitimacy, credibility, and 
adaptability. It fosters flexibility  in adapting to changing technologies and issues . Transparency is 
essential, with consensus -based decision -making processes reflecting multistakehol der input.  
Key commitments  
The Global Digital Compact  should recognize the efforts of the Internet Governance Forum Policy 
Network on Internet Fragmentation  to counter fragmentation measures  and commit to maintain an 
open, interconnected, stable and interoperable Internet . It should reaffirm its support  to the  mandate 
of the IGF as the forum for cooperation and technical knowledge sharing among diverse stakeholders 
within the UN , that promote s the free exchange of ideas , fosters diverse thinking and community -
building, and produces best practice materials and policy insights.  
Cybersecurity  standards  should be enhanced as the lack of it can destroy trust of individuals, 
businesses, and governments in the open Internet.  The Global Digital Compact should advocate for and 
support capacity -building activities related to these standards, to ensure an open,  secure, and resilient 
internet that promotes social progress and economic growth.  
To prevent shutdowns, technical availability and integrity  should be preserved and any restrictions must 
have a legitimate purpose based on  international law.  
4. PROTECT DATA  
Core principles  
International data flows, data portability and access to safe, secure, and privacy -protective digital 
goods  and services  for everyone are crucial for the functioning of the global economy and to foster 
innovation and economic  opportunities across all sectors.  
Beyond basic social exchanges, free data flows facilitate s international cooperation  in essential areas 
such as scientific research, law enforcement, and global security , and help managing global crises like 
pandemics an d climate change.  
Moreover, a  human -centric digital transformation  also requires to support local data and technological 
ownership for a safe and secure digital environment . Trust is a central element while the lack of it 
creates uncertainty and discourages participation in the global economy. Trust requires Governments 
and legislators  to ensure personal and other data are protected through robust cybersecurity 
infrastructure and a  trustworthy legal framework  for data protection. Policy and regulatory 
environments for data protection and access need to adhere to up-to-date best practices in privacy  and 
security  in data access, sharing, use and governance . Policies should  also  promote human rights, 
democratic values and privacy .  
 
 
 
5 
 Emmanuelle Duquenne  – Policy advisor  – Digital Future Foundation  
 Equally, efforts are needed to define principles and safeguards for  government access to personal data  
held by the private sector, while transparency policies should prohibit excessive costs , burdens and risks 
on providers that comply with legal obligations.  
Key commitments  
The Global Digital Compact should adhere to high data protection standards  and focus on protecting 
data while ensuring fairness, competitiveness, and data -driven innovation. A balance must be found 
between data protection, trade secret protection, innovation and investment in the data economy . 
Enhanced global cooperation  on data  governance and interoperability across policy and regulatory 
systems is needed to overcome differences and identify opportunities.  
Special attention should be given to policies  that prevent data -extractive models and personal data 
export to inadequately p rotected jurisdictions.  
With regard to government access to personal data , OECD countries have adopted an agreement for 
privacy and human rights protection when accessing personal data for national security and law 
enforcement purposes.  
5. APPLY HUMAN RIGHT S ONLINE  
Core principles  
Human rights and fundamental freedoms apply both online and offline . Internationally recognized 
human rights standards, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the United Nations Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights, and the Global Network Initiative Principles, should guide a 
responsible approach of  online activities. Human rights should be also considered in the design and 
life-cycle of emerging technologies.  
General internet monitoring should be prohibited  and investigation  to tackle illegal content should be 
targeted and proportionate with respect to individual rights.  
Beyond freedom of expression , safer marketplaces and access to information to ensure the Internet's 
role in fostering development goals, special attention should be given to technical tools for law 
enforcement to investigate c rimes  of child sexual abuse and exploitation , gender -based violence 
reinforced by built -in bias in algorithms , or illegal content, such as copyright infringements and terrorist 
content.  
Key commitments  
The Global Digital Compact should commit to human rights and fundamental freedoms and ensure 
equal protection of rights online and offline .  
Human rights and fundamental freedoms due diligence should be addressed as  one of the the root 
causes of Internet fragmentation  and is  a shared responsibility  of intergovernmental organizations, 
governments, private sector, technical community, and civil society.  
The Global Digital Compact should promote a human rights -based approach through out the cycle of 
digital technologies , including emerging technologies.  
Building resilient and democratic societies  relies on anti -corruption, media and information literacy, 
election integrity, and capacity -building efforts in digital security training for civil society, journalists, and 
human rights defenders.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 Emmanuelle Duquenne  – Policy advisor  – Digital Future Foundation  
 6. ACCOUNTABILITY FOR DISCRIMINATION AND MISLEADING CONTENT  
Core principles  
Safeguar ding global security  in countering foreign information manipulation to undermine democratic 
electoral infrastructure and political processes or interfering during conflicts or crises is crucial. 
Therefore, media freedom and journalists' safety  should be protected . 
Stakeholders should address challenges presented by onlin e disinformation and c itizens should be 
empowered to make  informed choices online , with access to diverse, transparent, reliable information.  
Key commitm ents 
While transparency and accountability to avoid the misuse of technologies are crucial, the Global Digital 
Compact should recognize pre -existing tools and initiatives to ensure consistency  and effectiveness 
of any global regulatory framework related to  discrimination and misleading content.  
The Global Digital Compact should support an online environment free from information manipulation, 
online sexual and gender -based violence, hate speech, and harmful content.  Combating discrimination, 
special attention should also be given to accessible persons with disabilities.  
Platforms should be encouraged to keep on adopting and adapting accountable practices. Policies on 
content governance and their governance are to be designed in line with international human rights, 
democracy, and rule of law standards. In this respect , principles and guidelines developed by the  Global 
Network Initiative (GNI) are becoming a global standard for human rights in the ICT sector.  
7. REGULATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
Core principles  
AI has the potential to benefit the society  and the economy  in many ways and to address  world 
challenges as climate change , energy transition  and pandemics. It can be leveraged to make 
infrastructure s and services more efficient, or for safety, cybersecurity,  and sustainability.  
Essential to  economic development , AI could also  intensify discrimination and  digital divide . Therefore, 
transparent and robust algorithms need  to prevent unfair biases and ensure that AI contributes 
positively to society.  Policymakers need to  develop proportiona te, risk -based regulations that promote 
robust and trustworthy AI applications while enabling innovation and societal benefits.  
The OECD  Principles on AI  define h ow governments and other stakeholders  can shape a human -centric 
approach to trustworthy AI . They  define terms and concept and p romote AI that is innovative and 
trustworthy and that respects human rights and democratic value , based  on 5 value -based principles 
and recommendations for policy makers.  
Value -based principles  
1. Inclusive growth, sustainable development and well -being  
2. Human -centered values and fairness  
3. Transparency and explainability  
4. Robustness, security and safety  
5. Accountability  
Recommendations for policy makers  
1. Invest in AI R&D  
2. Foster a digital ecosystem for AI  
3. Provide an enabling policy environment for AI  
4. Build human capacity and prepare for labour  market transition  
5. International cooperation for trustworthy AI  
 
 
 
7 
 Emmanuelle Duquenne  – Policy advisor  – Digital Future Foundation  
 The European Union follows a human -centric, pro -innovation and risk -based approach to AI, grounded 
in fundamental rights and values such as democracy and the rule of law . The legislative process on the 
proposed AI Act and Artificial Intelligence Liability Directive , is underway.  
A multistakeholder approach is needed to  collaborate  on flexible  guidelines and standards , to share 
knowledge and experience , to foster trust in AI systems and to develop responsible, accountable and 
safe AI , building on results and ethic al considerations .  
Key commitments  
The Global Digital Compact should recognize broadly endorsed principles for trustworthy AI  such as 
the OECD Principles. It should foster flexible and adaptative regulation as the technology evolve, based 
on a risk -based approach ranging from codes of conduct for low -risk A I systems to prohibition of AI 
applications that violate fundamental rights and of lethal autonomous weapons systems.   
Invest ment  in AI research and development and in necessary skills , ensuring a fair transition for 
workers , should be  encouraged . 
To support global cooperation for the implementation of the OECD Principles , the Global Digital 
Compact  should f oster a digital ecosystem and encourage coordination and collaboration for 
trustworthy AI . Stakeholders should share knowledge and help identify best practices, ensuring that 
standards and guidelines are set in a transparent way.  
8. DIGITAL COMMONS AS A GLOBA L PUBLIC GOOD  
Core principles  
Increased open data and open -source initiatives , respecting common core principles and standards  and 
aiming to leverage innovation and create a competitive market through shared knowledge and 
resources have the potential to bring significant economic benefits .   
A balance should be struck between the necessity for more accessible data to encourage talents to 
contribute to digital commons and facilitate global cooperation, and compliance with privacy protection 
and digital public rights  due to the risk of misuses and privacy breaches on the other hand.  
Key commitments  
The Global Digital Compact should promote  increased open and aggregated data for the public interest, 
as well as open -source initiatives  and resilient digital infrastructures  to enhanc e democratic digital 
societies .  
Grass -root projects in open source software and hardware are crucial for developing digital commons 
and should be supported.  
Brussels, April 29th 2023  
 
Emmanuelle Duquenne  
Policy advisor  
Digital Future Foundation  
(in her individual capacity)  
