Wikimedia Foundation 
contribution to the
Global Digital Compact
30 April 2023

2
Introduction        1
1. Avoid internet fragmentation   2
2. Protect data        3
3. Apply human rights online     5
4. Accountability for discrimination 
and misleading content     6
5. Digital commons as a 
global public good       8
6. Liability Protections for 
community-led Platforms     9
7. Copyright        10
TABLE OF
CONTENTS
1
Introduction
About the Wikimedia Foundation 
The Wikimedia Foundation is the nonprofit 
organization that hosts Wikipedia and other 
free knowledge projects . The vision of our 
free knowledge movement is a world in 
which every single human being can freely 
share in the sum of all knowledge. To this 
end, we support a vibrant community of 
more than 300,000 volunteers around the 
world, who contribute to the Wikimedia 
projects by adding, editing, and verifying 
content in over 55 million articles across 
300 languages, all for free and without ads.
About the Wikimedia Projects
Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects 
provide free access to neutral, well-sourced 
information about science, culture, 
history, and more encyclopedic subjects. 
The information in question is added, 
organized, and edited by a decentralized 
community of volunteers who engage in 
open debate to reach consensus around 
content decisions and policies . Volunteers 
address most everyday content issues 
on the Wikimedia projects, such as 
intentional vandalism or edits that do not 
meet Wikipedia’s reliability and neutrality 
standards, without interference from the 
Foundation. This unique community-led 
governance and content moderation model 
has allowed the Wikimedia projects to 
achieve the prominence and high quality 
they have now, and the volunteer-led, 
distributed decision-making that occurs on 
the Wikimedia projects is a manifestation 
of the ideals of online participation 
and expression.
The Wikimedia model is unique and allows 
editors and volunteers to work together 
towards the creation of a shared knowledge. 
We believe that this model should be 
protected and supported, as well as other 
community-based models of information 
sharing. However, these are often unknown 
by governments and agencies drafting 
policies and tech regulation.   Internet-related policy development 
should not only be consistent with 
universal human rights standards, but also 
developed and implemented through a 
multi-stakeholder model and be grounded 
in a transparent and accountable process, 
with meaningful participation of different 
stakeholders, who can best advocate for 
alternative models of positive internet 
developments. For this reason, we 
appreciate the United Nations initiative to 
develop a Global Digital Compact through 
a multi-stakeholder process, and welcome 
the opportunity to submit our input.
The Wikimedia community experiences 
the consequences of technology 
regulation everyday, and sometimes faces 
unintended consequences of misguided 
policies alongside harms caused by laws 
that are inconsistent with human rights 
standards. With these concerns in mind, 
the Foundation’s Global Advocacy team, 
composed of experts in technology policy 
and regulation, has worked to collect 
input that reflects and highlights both the 
Wikimedia model explained above and the 
experience of our global communities 
and volunteers.
ADavenport (WMF), CC BY-SA 4.0

2
Our team worked to reflect that experience 
and Wikimedia’s nonprofit, volunteer-led 
model in our recommendations, which 
have been collected from the Foundation’s 
individual experts and then reviewed 
collegially as a team.
1. Avoid internet 
fragmentation
Core Principles  
An open, interoperable, resilient, and 
secure internet is essential for Wikimedia 
projects, which are hosted and run 
globally so that everyone, everywhere, can 
participate in the sum of all knowledge. 
For instance, Wikipedia is available in 
more than 300 languages, regardless of 
geographies, and Wikimedia volunteers can 
contribute to multiple language versions, 
no matter their location. 
Laws intending to split the internet and/or 
create differences in access to the internet 
harm the projects and make it impossible to 
realize our vision.
The 2022 OHCHR report on internet 
shutdowns highlights how the lack of 
internet access, especially during periods 
of conflict, is connected with human rights 
abuses, and the disruption of health and 
welfare systems. The 2021 UN Secretary 
General report “Our Common Agenda” 
indicates universal access to the internet 
as an enabler of human rights. Internet 
shutdowns, disruptions of service, and any 
means to create differences in internet 
access across regions are a direct violation 
of people’s human rights. Wikimedia 
volunteers work worldwide to create, share, 
and maintain trustworthy information 
concerning all human knowledge, and do 
so even in locations with limited internet 
access, such as war zones or remote 
rural areas. Internet fragmentation and 
shutdowns prevent their work on the 
Wikimedia projects and readers’ access to 
vital information. The information they can 
access and share is essential to form free opinions, especially where access to said 
information is limited. 
Avoiding internet fragmentation is 
paramount to ensure that the most 
vulnerable parts of the population, no 
matter the geographies, can more generally 
have access to vital information and 
participate in the sum of all knowledge.
Participation in sharing knowledge both 
with and from those most vulnerable is 
essential to Wikimedia projects, which 
is why it is vital to promote a diverse 
and equitable digital environment 
where technological innovation is at 
the service of the common good. Said 
digital environment makes it possible for 
Wikimedia volunteers to share knowledge 
from different perspectives and sources 
in different cultural and geographical 
areas, enabling minorities and historically-
excluded voices not only to participate 
in the sum of all knowledge, but also to 
make content on Wikimedia projects more 
trustworthy and less biased by including 
local and community perspectives. 
A fragmented internet, on the contrary, 
risks increasing inequalities.
Key Commitment/ Pledges/Actions
Legislation that fragments and splits the 
internet by imposing different standards 
and requirements in different geographies 
causes undue burden on global platforms 
like Wikipedia as well as on its volunteers. 
Because Wikimedia volunteers contribute 
content in various languages regardless 
of their locations, they cannot continue to 
access and share knowledge if the internet 
is fragmented.
• Governments, civil society, and private 
companies should prioritize a free, open, 
interoperable, reliable, and secure internet, 
and avoid any regulation or policy that can 
lead to a splinternet.

3
• Governments should take appropriate 
measures to ensure that digital innovation 
serves the common good, and to reduce 
risks of market concentration lowering 
people’s choices and opportunities to access 
the internet, its information, and services.
Everyone, everywhere can only participate 
in the sum of all knowledge if they have 
equal access to the internet, especially 
minorities and historically-excluded 
communities. If governments impose 
sanctions affecting internet services and 
activities, especially in conflict zones or 
areas where minorities reside, this can 
prevent these and other people from 
accessing Wikimedia projects and their 
content. Similarly, when people do not 
have equal access to the internet, this 
harms their ability to access and share 
information, which is essential for the 
exercise of their human rights.
• Governments should ensure that 
international sanctions do not prevent 
communities from accessing the internet.
• Governments should promote and 
provide affordable broadband services and 
extension of broadband services in remote 
or underserved communities.
The Foundation promotes the Wikimedia 
model and other examples of open, 
community-led, equitable information 
sharing. Unfortunately, these models are 
often not well-known to lawmakers. The 
result can be laws and regulations that 
inadvertently hinder the functioning of 
platforms like Wikipedia due to their focus 
on the top-down, centrally-directed model 
of large commercial platforms. Multi-
stakeholder participation in technology 
policy regulation is essential to ensure that 
the diversity of models that exist on the 
internet are considered and supported by 
emerging legislation.• Governments and international 
organizations should ensure that a wide 
variety of stakeholders are adequately 
involved in internet-related decision-
making processes, especially civil society 
groups, and that these processes are 
grounded in transparency 
and accountability.
2. Protect data
Core Principles  
Privacy is a human right. Its unwarranted 
invasion not only interferes with the 
right to free expression and other human 
rights, but can also represent an existential 
risk for minorities and others who are 
disproportionately exposed to surveillance 
and other risks, including journalists, 
activists, dissidents, and marginalized 
persons whose governments seek to 
monitor and silence.
Wikimedia projects are edited by volunteers 
of every identity—social, religious, ethnical, 
and political, to name a few. They can often 
be members of at-risk categories, and their 
volunteer work can at times lead to political 
prosecution, incarceration, and even risks 
to their lives. To ensure their safety, it is 
essential that their identities are 
protected on the internet and that their 
privacy is respected. 
Our goal is that everyone, everywhere, can 
participate in the sum of all knowledge, but 
people cannot engage freely in it if their 
activities are being tracked. Surveillance 
that fails to adhere to the “necessary and 
proportionate” principle is particularly 
damaging to human rights and has 
significant chilling effects on the exchange 
of free knowledge.
Collecting user data also presents a 
cybersecurity risk. There is no foolproof 
way of storing data. In case of a data 
breach, the personal data of Wikimedia 

4
volunteers can be used by bad actors to 
persecute and endanger them. For this 
reason, the Foundation collects very little 
personal information about our users, and 
retains it for only a short time. The less data 
online platforms hold, the less attractive 
they are to hackers, hostile governments, 
and other bad actors that seek to access 
sensitive data and present an immediate 
and serious risk to their users—and, in 
the case of the Foundation, even the lives 
of Wikimedia volunteers. Due to our 
principled support for privacy, we also 
do not track people across the internet, 
display ads, or sell user data to anyone. 
In accordance with the Human Rights 
Council Resolution on the promotion, 
protection and enjoyment of human rights 
on the Internet, which states that technical 
solutions to secure and protect the 
confidentiality of digital communications, 
including measures for encryption and 
anonymity, are important to ensure the 
enjoyment of all human rights offline and 
online, we advocate for data minimization 
as well as pseudonymization and 
aggregated or de-identified data, which also 
improve cybersecurity. 
 
Key Commitment/ Pledges/Actions
Only when everybody, everywhere can 
participate in the sum of all knowledge 
can it be free and open. However, for 
many Wikimedia volunteers, contributing 
to the projects can mean having to share 
information that contradicts government claims, or that would expose them to 
unwanted attention. This is especially true 
for minorities and the most vulnerable 
parts of the population. For some 
volunteers, a data breach or doxxing can 
mean a threat to their freedom or even life.
• Governments, as well as private 
companies, should refrain from 
implementing surveillance policies, 
technologies, and services that violate 
human rights. Legislation providing 
for targeted surveillance should 
becomplemented with robust data 
protection laws. Without adequate 
safeguards, people have no recourse to 
protect themselves from unauthorized 
surveillance, targeted criminal activities, 
or data breaches.
 
• Governments should ensure that 
surveillance laws adhere to “necessary 
and proportionate” principles, and should 
hence refrain from engaging in mass or 
blanket surveillance of 
communications online.
• Governments must ban the sale of private 
surveillance technology that has been used 
to surveil journalists and human rights 
activists until proper safeguards to protect 
human rights are in place, and there is 
adequate assurance that this technology 
will be used only for legitimate purposes.
• Governments should minimize the 
number of targets for surveillance, and 
should commit to notifying targets of 
surveillance that their communications 
have been collected once the purpose of the 
surveillance has concluded.
•  Private companies should minimize 
the data they collect about their users to 
reduce the amount of data available for 
government surveillance.
• Private companies should not retain user 
data longer than necessary to achieve
legitimate purposes, and should de-identify 
and/or delete data at regular intervals.

5
• Private companies should be transparent 
with users about the data they collect and 
when that data might be shared with 
other entities.
• Private companies should inform their 
users when their information has been 
shared with a government agency, unless 
they are legally prevented from doing so.
3. Apply human 
rights online
Core Principles 
 
The internet is a key tool for facilitating 
freedom of expression, which empowers 
individuals to exercise many other rights, 
such as the rights to education, artistic 
expression, economic advancement, 
free thought, and political participation. 
Individuals everywhere, no matter national 
or subnational borders, have the right 
to access the internet freely in order to 
exercise their freedom of expression, 
including during times of conflict 
or disaster. 
The Foundation’s commitment to protect 
the Wikimedia volunteer community-led governance model reflects the strong 
commitment to freedom of expression 
built into our projects. This commitment 
has helped make them reliable sources of 
knowledge for billions of people in pursuit 
of a better world. In many ways, the work 
that volunteers contribute to collective 
projects like Wikipedia can build the 
cooperation and understanding, as well as 
the social and technological skills, which 
are crucial to the efforts needed toward 
achieving the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). 
In fact, the right to freedom of expression 
directly contributes to the achievement 
of the SDGs by enabling the basic 
coordination and communication 
necessary to effectuate any of these goals. 
Strong protections for this right and that of 
association create the conditions to form 
movements, share information, and build 
upon the advances of a global community. 
Human rights principles require 
governments to refrain from infringing 
upon individuals’ freedom of expression 
and right to privacy online. Strong technical 
and policy solutions by private sector 
entities and online platforms, including 
community-led platforms like Wikimedia 
projects, are necessary to protect their 
users’ freedom of expression and privacy.
Key Commitment/ Pledges/Actions
Governments, international organizations, 
private sector entities (including technology 
companies), and online platforms are 
responsible for protecting human rights 
principles in online spaces. Human 
rights principles should be at the core of 
government policies, as well as all content 
moderation and privacy decisions made by 
private sector entities and 
online platforms. 
• Governments should prioritize human 
rights principles in all laws, policies, and 
regulations affecting the internet.
Victorgrigas, CC BY-SA 4.0

6
• Governments should enact policies 
that prevent them from overreaching 
and requesting user data and/or content 
alterations as well as from engaging in 
censorship in ways that are inconsistent 
with human rights principles.
• Private sector entities and online 
platforms should make human rights 
commitments in alignment with the UN 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, and should enact strong technical 
and policy solutions to safeguard users’ 
human rights online.
• Private sector entities and online 
platforms presented with government 
requests for user data and/or content 
alterations, or government-imposed 
censorship, should respond in a manner 
that upholds human rights principles in 
accordance with the UN Guiding Principles 
on Business and Human Rights. 
• Private sector entities, including online 
platforms, should conduct due diligence to 
identify and mitigate human rights harms 
they cause, contribute to, or to which they 
are linked. 
• Governments, private sector entities, 
and online platforms should engage 
constructively and in good faith with civil 
society, grassroots movements, academics, 
and individuals in order to 
promote accountability. 
• Civil society, grassroots movements, 
academics, and individuals should hold 
governments, private sector entities, and 
online platforms that violate human rights 
principles online accountable.
• Governments as well as private companies 
should promote a human rights-based 
approach to the design, development, 
deployment, dissemination, evaluation, and 
regulation of digital technologies, including 
accountability of both governments and 
technological products and services. 4. Accountability for 
discrimination and 
misleading content
Core Principles  
Wikipedia is currently the largest resource 
for open and free knowledge in the 
world. It is one of the most consulted 
websites worldwide, and its data is also 
used by search engines like Google, 
virtual assistant technologies like Siri and 
Alexa, and machine learning algorithms 
for information and fact-checking 
purposes. This makes Wikipedia, and 
the other Wikimedia projects, targets of 
disinformation. Thanks to its 
community-led model, which includes 
thousands of volunteers worldwide, 
Wikipedia continues to provide free 
information that is sourced and vetted by 
its volunteers, positively influencing the 
entire information ecosystem.
When addressing discrimination and 
misleading content online, governments, 
private companies, civil society 
organizations, and other stakeholders must 
make sure that legislative proposals do 
not end up hurting the right to freedom 
of expression as well as digital commons 
platform models like Wikipedia. 
For example, laws seeking to fight 
disinformation by increasing platform 
liability for user-generated content pose a 
direct threat to Wikipedia’s decentralized, 
community-led content moderation model, 
which as noted provably works well 
in keeping disinformation and vandalism 
off widely-read and influential 
Wikipedia articles .
Copyright laws creating undue barriers to 
access to knowledge or requiring tracking 
of content production are a direct threat 
to the Wikimedia model. To establish a 
healthy information ecosystem, it is crucial 
to promote flexible copyright regimes 

7
and open licenses that enable sharing 
factual, trustworthy information for non-
commercial and public interest purposes. 
This is vital because online spaces are left 
open for disinformation when accurate 
information is unavailable to be shared for 
these purposes. 
Wikipedia’s content moderation principles 
do not allow original research: information 
must be based on sources that the volunteer 
community has deemed reliable. Hence, 
Wikipedia both contributes directly to the 
information ecosystem through its open 
model, and also relies on this ecosystem 
being healthy for its content. The quality of 
content in turn suffers if the ecosystem is 
not composed of a plurality of trustworthy 
and diverse media outlets. To ensure public 
access to reliable information, support for 
broad public access to independent media 
and research must be prioritized, especially 
local and community media.
Key Commitment/ Pledges/Actions
The efforts of Wikimedia projects to 
develop more trustworthy content rely 
on the diversity of volunteers and their 
community-led content creation and 
moderation model, which emphasizes 
consensus and use of reliable sources.
Such content moderation, very different 
from that of large for-profit technology 
companies, requires time. To protect 
community-led, public interest, and 
non-commercial models, emerging 
legislation should allow adequate time 
for communities to collectively work on 
content. All stakeholders should ensure 
these online platforms and models are 
shielded by liability protections so they can 
operate and thrive.
Governments as well as private 
organizations and groups have coordinated 
and encouraged disinformation campaigns 
to disrupt or exert influence over 
Wikimedia editorial processes. 
These actions interfere with people’s rights 
to access neutral, verifiable information, 
and to express themselves. Coordinated disinformation is a particular 
threat to versions of Wikipedia in languages 
that are edited by relatively few volunteers, 
who need more time for edits and 
moderation. Volunteers—more so those 
who are minorities or come from at-risk 
categories—may face persecution for their 
efforts to confront governments’ attempts 
to share misleading information, especially 
when Wikipedia becomes an online redoubt 
for unbiased information.
• Governments should forbid laws that use 
disinformation and propaganda as pretexts 
to promote their own particular points of 
views and curb political opposition. Hence, 
governments should not be the sole arbiters 
of what constitutes disinformation.
• Governments and international 
organizations should ensure multi-
stakeholder monitoring of influence 
campaigns, focusing primarily 
on disinformation actions over 
misleading content.
• Proposed laws, including those seeking to 
address disinformation, should be subject 
to human rights impact assessments, and 
existing regulations and laws should be 
subject to periodic human rights review.
Wikimedia projects and the rest of 
the information ecosystem influence 
each other: providing and requiring 
reliable sources makes both for 
healthy encyclopedias and a healthy 
environment. Hence, healthy and diverse 
independent media, especially at the 
local and community level, are essential. 
Accordingly, regulation should support 
independent media, research, and all 
forms of independent and freely accessible 
information, especially when shared 
through open licenses.

8
5. Digital commons as a 
global public good
Core Principles  
Wikimedia projects’ content, be it text, 
images, data, or other, is created and 
developed under a Creative Commons 
open license and is, by definition, part 
of the digital commons. Informational 
resources and technologies are open to all, 
and these are designed to be used by the 
same communities that have created them. 
Everyone, everywhere, can access, reuse 
and/or remix them with attribution, and 
participate in their development in order 
to advance toward the Foundation’s goal of 
joining in the sum of all knowledge. 
This vision and the openness of Wikimedia 
projects makes their resources and content 
a global public good. Everyone, not only 
the Wikimedia volunteer community, can 
use and develop them, as well as further 
develop the community-led policies that 
sustain them. Minorities and historically-
excluded communities are especially 
encouraged to join in these efforts.
Digital commons such as Wikimedia 
projects are essential to provide wide 
access to accurate information, which in 
turn is fundamental for the development of 
the SDGs by supporting digital public goods 
that can be used by all.
As more services and information sources 
move online, having access to digital 
public squares and digital repositories of 
knowledge and memory is increasingly a 
prerequisite for participation in public life. 
The ability to access and share knowledge 
can create social good and promote social 
equity, but barriers to access often mirror 
and amplify existing inequities instead. 
Consequently, we need a robust public 
information infrastructure that supports 
and safeguards global public goods, since 
gathering and sharing information helps 
fulfill the promise of the internet as a 
digital public good. Such an information ecosystem requires not only investment in 
technical infrastructure to ensure easy and 
equitable access to public information, but 
also support for fields that produce and 
organize knowledge like journalism and 
academia. This support extends to legal 
structures and open and free licensing of 
many different types of information.
Key Commitment/ Pledges/Actions
Digital commons such as Wikipedia 
and other Wikimedia projects should be 
supported because they are global public 
goods, and contribute to the development 
of the SDGs.
 
• Governments and international 
organizations should protect and support 
the right of communities to create and 
maintain online platforms dedicated to 
public information and other digital 
public goods.
• Governments and international 
organizations should work through 
multi-stakeholder processes to develop 
standards and definitions for what 
constitutes a digital public good, ensure the 
right to expression online is protected, and 
that people are not punished for accessing 
or sharing factual information.
• Governments should balance intellectual 
property rights interests with the right to 
information, and ensure the continued 
existence of a robust public domain. 
• Governments and international 
organizations should invest in and promote 
the creation and distribution of content that 
is relevant to local and communities in a 
variety of languages.
• Governments and international 
organizations should support and invest 
in a variety of knowledge production and 
preservation organizations and institutions.
• Governments and international 
organizations should create policies that 

9
promote digital inclusion and safety for 
historically-excluded and/or 
marginalized groups.
• Governments and international 
organizations should invest in online 
connectivity and critical digital and 
media literacy.
6. Liability Protections 
for Community-led 
Platforms
Core Principles
Policymakers are seeking to impose 
increased liability on online platforms, 
holding them directly accountable 
for third-party hosted content. These 
legislative and regulatory efforts respond 
to very real online dangers: harassment, 
disinformation, and other harmful content. 
However, regulatory responses imposing 
liability on internet intermediaries 
inadvertently risk harming community-led 
models of information sharing and content 
moderation like Wikipedia.
The Foundation does not generally write, 
edit, or curate the articles on Wikipedia. 
Unlike large social media platforms, 
Wikimedia projects rely on a decentralized, 
volunteer-led content moderation model. 
The Foundation only complements 
community-led efforts by providing tools 
development, research, trust and safety 
support, and subject matter expertise.
The Wikimedia model, scalable and 
replicable, works on collaboratively-built 
trust. Most regulations aimed at curbing 
harms caused by the largest for-profit 
companies often fail to consider our model. 
Without intermediary liability protection, 
platform hosts including the Foundation 
would be forced to proactively monitor 
and preemptively delete content shared 
by volunteers in order to avoid endless 
lawsuits. Wikimedia projects could not exist 
as we know them: the volunteer community 
cannot set and enforce rules for content 
on the projects if the Foundation is held legally responsible for every upload or edit 
it makes. The outcome prevents ensuring 
that all people, regardless of economic, 
geographic, or other privileges, access 
information equitably.
While large commercial platforms have 
content rules written by staff and enforced 
by content moderators employees, 
community-led platforms rely on 
volunteers to create and enforce rules for 
permissible content. Human interactions 
imply both advantages and complications, 
and require real-time communications. 
Some hosted content may be offensive, 
inaccurate or misleading, and/or illegal, 
since mistakes happen even when 
moderating content in good faith. And 
yet, the Wikimedia model is reliable and 
resilient, reducing disinformation as well as 
content that is harmful and/or illegal.
Liability protections ensuring that 
platforms cannot be held legally 
responsible for user-generated content 
help support community-led content 
moderation models. They also allow 
platforms to give communities more 
control over content and encourage civic 
engagement when creating and developing 
collaborative information sharing projects.
Key Commitment/ Pledges/Actions
• Governments should grant online 
platforms legal protection from liability for 
user-generated content in order to protect 
the right to freedom of expression and 
encourage public interest spaces 
on the internet.
• Governments should consider the 
chilling effects that platform liability has 
on free expression, and the ways in which 
incentivizing platform censorship will 
harm human rights globally by decreasing 
the ability of marginalized groups to have 
their voices heard.
• Governments should explicitly recognize 
different types of business models, content 
moderation models, userbases, and goals 

10
when determining a given platform’s 
exposure to liability for 
user-generated content.
• Governments should not attach criminal 
liabilities for compliance officers, since 
fear of false prosecution and/or arrests can 
incentivize platforms to engage in 
excessive censorship. 
• Governments should not mandate the 
use of AI or automated tools for screening 
content. Very few platforms can afford 
deploying such technologies and, as a 
consequence, such a request would stifle 
innovation and create a barrier to entrance 
for start-ups and smaller organizations. 
Additionally, these tools can produce a 
number of false positives and negatives, 
which also casts chilling effects on 
free speech. 
• Governments should not require 
content takedowns by platforms. Instead, 
governments should consider notice-and-
action regimes that require platforms to 
review potentially harmful content and 
decide whether to take some form of action 
with respect to that content, especially 
allowing and promoting the use of 
community processes.
7. Copyright
Core Principles  
Copyright law establishes who can access, 
interact with, and use creative and cultural 
works. Hence, copyright regimes must 
properly balance the interests of the human 
rights to free expression and to education 
with the enforcement of intellectual 
property rights of private companies
and individuals.
Many copyright laws often provide 
intermediary liability protections on a 
notice and takedown basis. This regime 
can be abused to suppress speech, 
particularly where the volume of copyright 
notices or legal context rely on automatic 
removals based on flawed algorithmic identification. Even if content is restored 
after an incorrect removal, the initial 
suppression can limit its reach, impacting 
free expression at scale.
Copyright law should explicitly encourage 
free expression, and facilitate cultural 
participation and access to the benefits 
of knowledge and scientific progress. 
The public interest of knowledge and 
information protected by intellectual 
property rights should also be considered: 
suspensions and exceptions to copyright 
might further vital research, allow access 
to medicines and health technologies, or 
enable public and private institutions to 
increase the resilience of cultural heritage 
to natural and social disasters.
Content on Wikimedia projects is created, 
accessed, remixed, reused, and shared 
under a Creative Commons free culture 
license so that everyone, everywhere, 
can freely access, modify, and reuse it 
with attribution.
Copyright laws creating undue barriers 
to access to knowledge or requiring 
tracking of content production threaten 
the Wikimedia model, and other similar 
nonprofit, content creation and sharing 
models. Flexible copyright regimes and 
open licenses protect public interest 
platforms, and enable open sharing of 
factual, trustworthy information, which 
leads to a healthier information ecosystem.
• Governments should refrain from 
requiring that platforms decide whether 
hosted content subject to a copyright 
holder complaint infringes their rights. 
It is expected and desirable that only 
independent judicial authorities, not 
private sector entities, have the power to 
determine copyright infringement.
• Online copyright enforcement 
mechanisms required for platforms should 
not interfere unduly with free speech. Such 
mechanisms should adopt an educational 
and awareness-raising approach, rather 
than a retaliatory one requiring the 

11
removal or blocking of content through an 
expedited, extrajudicial process initiated by 
a copyright holder.
Key Commitment/ Pledges/Actions
• Governments, as well as international 
organizations, should promote the 
development of human rights-respecting 
copyright regimes.
• Governments should refrain from 
imposing copyright obligations on private 
sector entities to implement content 
filtering mechanisms.
• Governments should adopt international 
instruments that recognize and reinforce 
the public interest in copyright, including 
steps to ensure that copyright limitations, 
durations, and exceptions serve to 
strengthen access to knowledge 
across borders.
• Governments should support open 
access to all publicly funded educational, 
artistic, literary, and scientific knowledge. 
Governments should also consider that 
the public interest might, upon occasion, 
require the suspension of the intellectual 
property rights, say, that of vaccines, 
medicines, and other new technologies 
when faced with a pandemic. Similarly, 
the public interest might require research 
exceptions to copyright in order to increase 
the capacity to undertake further vital 
research and, thereby, better serve 
the public.
• Governments should support copyright 
limitations and exceptions that allow archives, 
libraries, and museums to fulfill their public 
interest missions and that allow teachers 
and students to use copyrighted materials 
for teaching and learning purposes. Flexible 
copyrights regimes allow that anyone, 
regardless of their background or resources, 
can learn, carry out, and benefit from research 
and innovation, and also access and enjoy 
knowledge and culture, even across borders, 
which greatly improves the resilience of culture 
and heritage during or after moments of crises 
such fires, wars, floods, and other natural or 
social and political disasters. 
• Governments should support making any 
content that has been significantly funded with 
public money freely available to the public. 
This includes educational content from public 
broadcasters, data collected and analyzed by 
government bodies, and publicly 
commissioned studies.
“Whose Knowledge? Decolonizing The Internet 
Conference Participants 026” by Heykc,
CC BY-SA 4.0
“Whose Knowledge? Decolonizing The Internet 
Conference Participants 018” by Heykc,
CC BY-SA 4.0
“Wikimania Bangladesh by Rono” by Ruhan, 
CC BY-SA 4.0
“Internationalism wmf” by Jason Krüger for 
Wikimedia Deutschland e.V., 
cropped by Bianca Flores,  CC BY-SA 4.0Cover image credits