UNGIS Input  for the Global Digital Compact  
     
 
I. Details  
Please select whether you are answering this survey for yourself or on behalf of an entity 
or organization.  
 
Name of entity/organization :  
 
United Nations Group on the Information Society (UNGIS)  
 
Type of entity/organization  (other):  
 
United Nations (UN) system’s inter -agency mechanism  
 
Description of entity/organization : 
 
The United Nations Group on the Information Society (UNGIS) is the United Nations (UN) 
system’s inter -agency mechanism for advancing policy coherence and programme 
coordination on matters related to information and communications technologies (ICTs) in 
support of internationally agreed development goals. Established in 2006 after the World 
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), the UNGIS mandate includes promoting 
collaboration and partnerships among the members of the Chief Executives Board (CEB) to 
contribute to the achievement of WSIS goals, providing guidance on issues related to inclusive 
information and knowledge societies, helping maintain issues related to science and 
technology at the top of the UN Agenda, and mainstreaming ICT for Development in  the 
mandate of CEB members. UNGIS is comprised of 38 Members and this contribution to the 
GDC  process is framed by the collective UNGIS experience and expertise  (visit www.ungis.org  
to view the list of members).  
 
UNGIS meets annually at  the WSIS Forum, which has evolved to become the world's largest 
annual gathering of the “ICT for development” community and a multistakeholder platform 
for coordination, information exchange, knowledge creation, sharing of best practices, and 
fostering partnerships to advance development goals.  
 
As an existing body of in teragency digital cooperation, UNGIS stands ready to ensure that 
efforts across the UN system are coherent, connected and coordinated to achieve maximum, 
sustainable impact. In the Decade of Action, UNGIS is a ready platform for knowledge 

exchange and valu able resource base that could support UN Member States and partners at 
the global and regional levels in leveraging innovative tools and approaches to accelerate 
progress on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
 
Entity/organization website :  
 
www.ungis.org   
 
Geographic Scope of Activity :  
 
Global  
Contact information for submission : 
Vladimir Stankovic, Program Officer, ITU  (vladimir.stankovic@itu.int ) 
II. Process of consultation/preparation   
Describe the process you followed to collect, consult, and prepare your input.  
 
Input was collected and coordinated through the series of meetings and drafting 
consultations, including:  
- United Nations Group on the Information Society (UNGIS) High -Level UNGIS Leader’s 
Meeting, during the WSIS Forum 2023  
- United Nations Group on the Information Society (UNGIS) Working Level Meeting, 
during the WSIS Forum 2023  
- Online consultations and drafting of input by all UNGIS members.  
 
What is the approximate number of  entities  that were engaged through process of 
consultation/preparation of input?  
 
26-50 
 
What is the approximate number of  people  engaged through process of 
consultation/preparation of input?  
 
26-50 
III. Inputs to the Global Digital Compact   
8. Other areas (please specify):  
- Value of UNGIS, as an UN inter -agency mechanism, input to the Global Digital Compact 
Consultations  
- ICTs rescuing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: WSIS Action Lines for 
building back better and accelerating the achievement of the SDGs ;          
                                         
Area: Value of  UNGIS,  as an UN inter -agency mechanism,  input to the Global Digital Compact  
Consultations  
 
a) Core Principles  
 
UNGIS’ objective is to develop extensive collaboration and partnerships among the CEB 
members in order to contribute to the achievement of the WSIS objectives, to help to 
maintain ICT -related issues as well as science and technology at the top of the UN Ag enda 
and finally to mainstream ICT for Development issues in the mandate of CEB members. To 
this end, UNGIS should complement to existing programmes and projects , including the 
Global Digital Compact,  by facilitating synergies and joint efforts, so as to m aximize 
coordinated action, coherence and effectiveness of the support to countries in their efforts 
towards achieving the WSIS goals agreed upon by the international community.  
 
In order to achieve its objectives, UNGIS:  
• Contributes towards WSIS implement ation, primarily at the international level, by 
mainstreaming the Information Society Agenda into the activities and programmes of 
CEB members;  
• Coordinates with the mechanisms for national and regional implementation 
established in the Tunis Agenda, as wel l as the multi -stakeholder implementation 
process;  
• Strengthens the role of the UN System in facilitating access of developing countries to 
new and emerging technologies, promoting transfer of technology, and 
mainstreaming science, technology and innovation  policies, including ICTs, into 
national development policies or poverty reduction strategies in accordance with the 
priorities of countries;  
• Facilitates synergies between organizations belonging to the UN system in order to 
maximize joint efforts, avoid duplication and enhance effectiveness in achieving the 
WSIS outcomes; and  
• Promotes public awareness about how the UN system is implementing WSI S and is 
facilitating better access for developing countries to new and emerging technologies.  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
In the ongoing Global Digital Compact process, given the need to ensure that the Compact 
supports the achievement of the SDGs , UNGIS can play a valuable role in supporting the 
coordination of all relevant parts of the UN system . 
 
Recognizing that discussions on O ur Common Agenda and especially its Global Digital 
Compact are complementary to the WSIS Framework,  the GDC consultation process and 
subsequent intergovernmental process are invited to make full use of the UNGIS network of 
more than 30  member organizations . 
Area: ICTs rescuing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development                                                                      
WSIS Action Lines for building back better and accelerating the achievement of the SDGs  
 
a) Core Principles  
 
Since 2015, the WSIS Process and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development have  been  
aligned by stakeholders to integrate information and communication technologies (ICTs) into 
their approaches in implementing the activities/initiatives to support the im plementation of 
the 2030 Agenda. Achievements have been made by governments and stakeholders  in the  
nearly 20 years since the inception of the WSIS. However, challenges remain, and numerous 
new technology trends and policies have emerged.  
 
b) Key Commitme nt/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
UNGIS agrees that harnessing the power of digital will be vital to rescuing the SDGs, and 
continue s to leverage on the WSIS Framework, and other complimentary processes such as 
Our Common Agenda and especially its Global Digital Compact.  
 
UNGIS underlines the importance of effective alignment and coordination between the 
WSIS+20 review process and the GDC process to avoid duplication and  look at  synergies .  
 
Some UNGIS members will also be  shar ing their strategies  through individual submissions, 
highlighting the challenges and success stories in implementing digital transformation and 
propose ways to accelerate the implementation of the WSIS Action Lines and digital 
cooperation.  
Any other comments on the Global Digital Compact?  
UNGIS, serving as a  long -established  model of UN collaboration, is working on exploring 
mechanisms which will contribute to re scuing and accelerating the SDGs, including the 
ongoing discussions on the Global Digital Compact. Within the framework of WSIS Action 
Lines and its linkages with SDGs, considering the upcoming WSIS+20 and the Summit of the 
Future, UNGIS  as the first model  of an inter -agency mechanism  continues to be relevant as a 
successful example of digital cooperation with 20 years of experience.  
 
UNGIS stands ready  to be further leveraged for the good of the UN system  and strengthened 
for enhanced coherence, coordinat ion and collaboration within the UN system . 
  
The WSIS+20 process has already started through discussions at the Commission on Science 
and Technology for Development and at the WSIS Forum 2022 and 2023 . The WSIS+20 Forum 
High -level Event in Geneva, will take place from 27 to 31 May 2024 . All stakeholders are 
invited to participate and contribute to  the Forum’s upcoming Open Consultation Process  and 
help shape its program and agenda, also aiming to reflect  on the achievements of the WSIS 
process in the past 20 years, its future direction, and its interconnection with other global 
processes, including the Global Digital Compact.  In parallel, t he launch of the official WSIS+20 
Open Consultation Process will coincide with the planning and holding of GDC consultations, 
complementing discussions in both ways.  