Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
1 Meta is grateful for the opportunity to provide Meta’s input on the Global Digital Compact (GDC). The 
GDC is intended to “outline shared principles for an open, free and secure digital future for all,” and the 
multistakeholder consultation process toward its development has allowed interested parties to identify 
areas of agreement and future cooperation. The seven areas of the GDC identified in the Secretary -
General’s Common Agenda  provide a useful framework to address some of the key challenges currently 
facing the digital space. Meaningful connectivity – including affordable internet access and digital literacy 
– is necessary to promote sustainab le development in the digital age. Avoiding internet fragmentation 
through the free flow of data and interoperable frameworks is essential to ensuring the full enjoyment of 
human rights online. Policies supporting internet governance models that allow for localization and 
internet shutdowns should be explicitly opposed. Steps must be taken to protect data and ensure the 
protection of human rights online, while avoiding duplication of existing and ongoing UN workstreams. 
Meta takes instances of discriminatio n and misleading content seriously. We support promoting best 
practices to address these risks, as well as those associated with emerging technologies including artificial 
intelligence (AI), while maintaining an environment that fosters innovation and deve lopment. Finally, 
input from all stakeholders is necessary to further define and implement the protection of the digital 
commons as a global public good.  
 
We support the leadership role of the UN in facilitating a global process to co -create principles tow ard an 
“open, free and secure digital future for all,” and to improve global digital cooperation through the GDC. 
We believe that internet fragmentation threatens the fundamental principles that undergird the UN 
charter and would have an adverse effect on the protection of human rights, advancement of the SDGs, 
international peace,  and security. With this in mind, we are in resounding agreement that the GDC must 
promote an open, globally connected, and secure internet with respect for human rights at its co re.  
 
This will require the GDC to focus on three main goals:  
1. To place the enjoyment of universal human rights, including the rights to freedom of expression, 
and privacy at its heart;  
2. To protect the free flow of data across borders ; and  
3. To promote a genui nely multistakeholder approach to cooperation that defends an open internet 
in which all stakeholders can come together to contribute their expertise.   
 
We have seen firsthand the transformative power of digital technologies around the world, in times of 
crisis and particularly to advance human rights. For example, in Iran, protestors used WhatsApp and 
Instagram to advocate for women’s rights, and following the recent earthquakes in Türkiye and Syria, 
digital tools were used to help provide reliable relief  information and make sure those impacted can stay 
connected with their loved ones. Digital inclusion, connectivity, and human rights must be at the core of 
the GDC to realize the full benefits of digital technologies - and these values are consistent with  Meta’s 
mission to promote and uphold voice, community, inclusion, safety, and privacy.  
 
We look forward to the GDC – and the UN Tech Envoy’s Office – serving as a coordination mechanism for 
all workstreams related to global digital development and inclus ion. The GDC should help create, 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
2 coordinate, and communicate a more unified, one -UN narrative and approach to facilitate collaboration 
across UN departments and with external stakeholders, as well as to avoid duplication.  
 
Meta continues to be a construct ive supporter of workstreams related to the GDC, and we appreciate the 
Secretary -General's prioritization of these issues. We encourage all actors to embrace the UN’s values of 
openness, collaboration, and respect for human rights as we harness this new op portunity to reinforce 
the value – and power – that multistakeholder  discussions can bring to defining a shared vision for our 
digital future.  
 
 
Connect all people to the global internet  2 
Avoid internet fragment ation  3 
Protect data  4 
Apply human rights online  5 
Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  6 
Regulation of AI  7 
Digital commons as a global public good  8 
 
Connect all people to the global internet  
For six years, Meta has partnered with Economist Impact, formerly the Economist Intelligence Unit, on a 
study known as the Inclusive Internet Index. A key finding is that while network coverage has continued 
to expand year on year, access to the internet remains far from universal.  
 
Although 800 million people came online b etween 2019 and 2021, over two and a half billion people are 
still offline according to the ITU. Of these, 96% live in developing countries. Many others remain under -
connected ; they use the internet but  do so infrequently. Previously, insufficient network coverage was 
the main barrier to internet access in many low - and lower middle -income countries. Growth in the 
number of people who use the internet has not kept pace with significant expansions in coverage since 
2017, creating a gap in internet usage. The  report found that people are unable, unwilling, or uninterested 
in using the internet and that affordability, relevance of, and trust in content available online remain 
significant barriers to closing the usage gap. Those who are left online often face le ss access to jobs, as 
well as critical e -health and e -education services that could contribute to socioeconomic development.  
Future work to close the digital divide and achieve meaningful connectivity for all by 2030, as highlighted 
in the SG’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation,1 should build on existing  workstreams. The principles of 
 
1 “UN Secretary General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation. ” https://www.un.org/en/content/digital -cooperation -roadmap/ . 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
3 growth, inclusiveness, sustainability, innovation, and partnership put forward in the ITU’s Connect 2030 
Agenda2 remain critical. UNESCO’s ROAM -X indicators further  elaborate specific metrics to monitor 
progress towards global meaningful connectivity.3 These and other existing workstreams should be 
foundational elements of future agreements to promote access.  
 
Making services and devices more affordable is key, as i s creating the conditions for the growth of relevant 
local content, including in local languages which will drive demand and benefits. We have seen how social 
media, often paired with mobile connectivity, has unlocked myriad opportunities for local and gra ssroots 
voices to reach new audiences, and offers important lessons as the international community considers 
how to preserve, maintain, and expand opportunities for individuals to enjoy their right to expression.  
 
Additionally, people need the skills to g et online, create and consume internet content, and use digital 
tools safely. The GDC should recognize the barriers preventing people from accessing the internet  and 
endeavor to improve the affordability and relevance of the internet,  and the ability of pe ople to draw 
value from it.  
 
The GDC should hold member states accountable for their unique role in promoting efforts to expand 
connectivity to the internet in a responsible and accountable manner. In addition to bridging access gaps, 
governments have a ro le to play in advancing awareness, digital literacy, and safety for all people in their 
countries.  
Avoid internet fragmentation  
To fully harness the benefits of the internet, particularly in support of achieving the UN SDGs, and to 
prevent adverse developm ents to the internet ecosystem, the GDC must promote an open, 
interconnected, and secure Internet - one that can deliver on the promise of inclusive connectivity for all 
by protecting the free flow of data across borders. The free flow of data is critical to accelerating the global 
economy, advancing the SDGs, promoting the free flow of information, and addressing the climate crisis. 
Digital products and services can only flourish in a trusted, safe, and secure online environment. However, 
we continue to se e growing impediments through forced data localization and differences in domestic 
approaches, creating uncertainty for governments, businesses, and individual users.4 
 
The GDC should embrace and emphasize internet freedom as foundational to the enjoyment  of human 
rights in the 21st century. In addition, it should explicitly oppose data localization and encourage the 
interoperability of frameworks to promote the free flow of data, while upholding privacy standards. This 
should take into account the ongoing  work by the OECD on the topic, including on the work on Trusted 
 
2 ITU. “Connect 2030 – An agenda to connect all to a better world.” 
https://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/backgrounders/Pages/connect -2030 -agenda.aspx .  
3 UNESCO . “ROAM -X Indicators. ” https://en.unesco.org/internet -universality -indicators/roamx -indicators . 
4 “G7 Vision for Operationali zing DFFT .” https://g7digital -tech -2023.go.jp/topics/pdf/pdf_20230430/annex1.pdf . 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
4 Government Access to Private Sector Held Data. The GDC should call for globally harmonized approaches 
to internet governance that promote the free flow of data across borders, safeguard encry ption, and 
ensure that individuals’ rights, like the rights to privacy and freedom of expression, are protected online.  
 
The GDC should also reinforce a global commitment to a multistakeholder model for internet governance 
and avoid non-duplication of existing work streams and fora. Given the complexity of the internet with 
overlapping rights and responsibilities across sectors and borders, a multistakeholder approach remains 
essential to preserve the Internet as a global platform. Th e UN has been at the forefront of establishing a 
multistakeholder approach as the norm. Stakeholders should aim to strengthen and leverage existing 
processes and venues, such as the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), ensuring funding, inclusive 
participation , and effective outcomes.  
 
The global internet is increasingly at risk of fragmentation and is under threat as the result of growing 
trends, including national restrictions that seek to control citizens’ access to information, data localization 
laws and restrictions on international data flows, and internet shutdowns. Actions by governments to limit 
or shut down the Internet only expand digital divides and create structural barriers to connectivity. Digital 
censorship and internet sh utdowns can be markers of deteriorating human rights conditions, and have 
critical impacts on social, economic, and political development.  
 
To protect an open internet, the GDC should call for member states to promote the open nature of the 
Internet, prot ect human rights as  anchored in the values and obligations of the UN Charter and the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, 
protect and promote the free flow of information, safeguard encryption t o ensure the protection, and 
commit to the multistakeholder governance model of the internet. A fragmented internet also prevents 
shared principles of responsible behavior and accountability. It is essential to promote a globally shared 
understanding and f rameworks for governments, industry,  and users to build and maintain the internet 
as a globally accessible, open, free, safe, and secure environment.  
Protect data  
We welcome the High -Level Panel’s recommendation to further develop a global commitment on di gital 
trust, safety, and security. To promote an open and free internet, governments, industry, and civil society 
need a shared vision, standardized implementation of norms for responsible uses of technology, and 
agreed priorities for further action. We al so look forward to further consultation and cooperation on 
developing and deploying information and communication technologies (ICTs) in a trustworthy manner, 
thus encouraging voluntary, risk -based approaches to cybersecurity,  and incorporating standards 
developed by global organizations through multistakeholder processes. We offer our support to 
complementary capacity -building initiatives for the public and private sectors in an effort to better 
prevent and react to harmful, malicious, and hostile behavior  online. We have already created 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
5 partnerships with several UN departments, both at the HQ and country level, as well as with civil society 
entities, and look forward to the creation of more.  
 
Focusing on harmonization of interoperability requirements can e nhance experiences, protect user 
privacy and security, and incentivize industry to create innovative new services. Interoperability tools have 
been and remain an important part of the digital ecosystem. Everything from foundational internet 
protocols and w eb standards to email rely on a set of interoperability solutions. In general, it is important 
that stakeholders keep in mind there is no one -size-fits-all approach to interoperability. Every product, 
platform, market, and ecosystem will have very differen t interoperability needs. The question we should 
ask is how to encourage the development of foundational models, frameworks, and tools that will offer 
the necessary preconditions for interoperability.  
 
Various UN processes have recognized cybersecurity as  an essential dimension of international security 
and provided valuable guidance on how to maintain an open, free, and secure internet. The spread of 
disinformation and, in particular harmful, life -threatening content and disruptive blanket internet 
shutdo wns, have been identified in the Secretary -General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation as 
challenges we need to collectively address. For people to feel safe and free to use digital products and to 
communicate online, the online environment must also be sust ainable. We therefore welcome an 
emphasis on the linkage between principles of digital trust and security and the ability to realize the 2030 
Agenda: Achieving a trusted, safe, and secure online environment requires regarding cybersecurity not 
just as an i nternational security issue, but also as an area of governance where governments, industry, 
and civil society all play a role.  
 
The internet needs guardrails, not roadblocks. Many are drawn to the idea of digital sovereignty, whereby 
establishing digital walls at their national borders they can better secure data generated by their citizens. 
We urge governments to resist protectionist policies that enable the misuse of how personal data is 
processed, stored, and secured. Instead, under such policies, the i nternet becomes less open, and the 
digital economy becomes more constrained. We support working with governments to adopt data 
regulation that preserves the fundamental human rights of individuals, holds companies accountable, and 
promotes security.  
 
We su pport the use of end -to-end encryption against overreaching surveillance and encroachments on 
freedom of expression. End-to-end encryption is a powerful tool for security and safety. It helps journalists 
communicate with sources without governments listeni ng in and  gives citizens in authoritarian regimes a 
lifeline to human rights advocates.  
Apply human rights online  
The protection of human rights is central to the UN’s mission, and cooperation among all stakeholders is 
essential to ensure that all rights, such as privacy and free expression, are protected online. Discussions 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
6 around the protection of human rights in the digital age should focus on the obligations of governments, 
as well as the responsibilities of companies to protect freedom of expression, t o protect people from 
incitement to violence, hate speech, harassment,  and other online harms, and to enable participation in 
political activities . Given the central role that it plays in international politics and policy setting, the UN is 
uniquely placed  to ensure the vision of multistakeholder engagement with governments, civil society, and 
the private sector. The UN has a track record of engaging the private sector on these issues. As the leading 
UN entity on human rights, OHCHR plays a key role as a co nvener and thought leader in this area including 
through the Business and Human Rights in Technology (B -Tech) initiative. These discussions should work 
to advance the goals outlined in the Secretary -General’s Roadmap on digital human rights, such as 
addres sing protection gaps, discouraging internet shutdowns, and providing more detailed guidance on 
the application of human rights standards in the digital age. We must acknowledge the threat to human 
rights embedded in harmful and hostile activities that stat es and non -state actors undertake online. 
Cybersecurity and the protection of human rights and freedoms online must go hand in hand.  
 
Meta’s human rights  policy sets out the human rights standards we strive to respect including the United 
Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights  (UNGPs). It sets out how we seek to apply these 
standards to our apps and products, policies, programming, and overall approach to our business. It 
describes our commitments to due diligence and reporting, as well as our commitment to pro tect human 
rights defenders and the governance mechanisms that seek to hold us accountable.  
 
The Global Network Initiative (GNI) provides a framework for how information and communications 
technology companies and their human rights stakeholders can prote ct people's rights to freedom of 
expression and privacy against overly broad or unlawful government requests. Meta has been a member 
of GNI since 2013. GNI members commit to following the GNI Principles and its Implementation Guidelines 
and are subject to an audit every 3 years to ensure they are meeting their commitments.  
Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
We recognize the shared challenge of ensuring safety online and encourage multistakeholder cooperation 
to help individuals, especi ally youth and vulnerable groups, make healthy decisions online, stay safe, and 
build resilience. We encourage innovation, including the use of artificial intelligence (AI), to help enhance 
efforts to address harmful content. We urge the GDC to consider ex isting recommendations such as the 
OECD Recommendation of the Council on Children in the Digital Environment. The GDC should also build 
on the existing work of the UN system, such as UNICEF’s programs on Child Rights in the Digital Age and 
the ITU’s work o n Child Online Protection. In fostering a safe online environment, the GDC should 
recognize the importance of educating and equipping individuals with digital skills and literacy, so users 
are empowered to make informed choices online and discern mis/disin formation.  
 
The GDC should consider  ongoing concerted efforts and investments of social media companies to 
strengthen transparency in addressing misleading, harmful, and discriminatory content online, by 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
7 promoting awareness of users’ rights to report content – and appeal content moderation decisions – and 
understand protections afforded to individual users. In addition, the GDC should recognize the importance 
of a whole -of-society approach in fostering internet freedom and digital inclusion. A wide range of 
relevant stakeholders have roles a nd responsibilities in dealing with online safety and harmful content, 
including public authorities, civil society, parents/caregivers, content creators, and people who use the 
internet each day. Whole -of-society collaboration helps improve understanding o f the safety activities of 
digital platforms, which in turn increases opportunities for meaningful and effective collaboration.  
 
Any effort toward creating a safer digital ecosystem should prioritize human rights -based, evidence -
based, and data -driven appr oaches that remain grounded in the principles of necessity, proportionality, 
and legality. We welcome efforts to create multistakeholder spaces for collaboration that allow for 
innovation and experimentation, while helping to delineate the roles and respon sibilities of governments, 
companies, civil society organizations, and the technical community. The GDC is correctly placed to call 
on governments to invest in fostering inclusive societies, enhancing digital safety and literacy, and 
supporting victims and  survivors of abuse. The GDC should call on companies to adopt multidisciplinary, 
evidence -, and risk -based approaches that empower users with tools and resources to customize their 
experiences to protect their privacy and safety, as well as to report any harm they encounter. The GDC 
can recognize ongoing industry efforts to combat harm against targeted communities and encourage 
companies to participate in tools that combat the spread of non -consensual intimate images, such as 
StopNCII.org and TakeItDown.NC MEC.org.  
Regulation of AI  
When it comes to emerging technologies such as AI, international cooperation can help ensure that 
countries around the world benefit from applications that support sustainable growth. International 
collaboration and interoperabili ty across governance frameworks is crucial for the development of a 
responsible AI. Organizations such as the OECD, UNESCO, and GPAI are already working on those issues, 
and should  look at enabling policy frameworks that address the opportunities and chall enges with AI.  
 
AI regulation should take into consideration existing frameworks that address issues around AI, including 
data protection, consumer law, competition law, and sectoral regulation, to avoid creating conflicts. This 
will help to provide greate r legal clarity, avoid duplicative regulation, and ensure a proportionate 
approach to these novel issues. For those countries that may not have developed relevant existing 
legislation, in certain areas a good starting point would be the OECD AI Principles,  around which there 
appears to be consensus , and which are rooted in human rights and consumer protection.   
 
Rather than creating inflexible rules, countries should focus on supporting and building on ongoing efforts 
to establish best practices and standa rds. And rather than providing prescriptive technical requirements, 
stakeholders should work together to provide opportunities for development and regularly update the 
standards and best practices for assessing, measuring, and comparing AI systems as they evolve. The 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
8 development of AI standards and regulations should be underpinned by a risk -based approach, focused 
on the most sensitive types of AI applications and sectors such as in cases where AI may produce decisions 
that cause legal or similarly signifi cant effects.  Above all, policymakers should not regulate the technology. 
There is a distinction between regulating the technology and regulating the uses of that technology. 
Regulators should focus on the latter.  
 
The GDC should prioritize the coordinatio n and collaboration among the many experts and stakeholders 
of the AI ecosystem and ensure that regulators’ legislative strategies complement other co - or self -
regulatory instruments (e.g., international AI principles, standards, ethical codes of conduct, NIST AI Risk 
Management Framework).  
 
Future agreements like the GDC should not duplicate existing workstreams, such as the OECD’s Guiding 
Principles on AI, GPAI, or UNESCO. Rather, they should build on their progress to establish consistent 
international positions that support the development of AI that benefits society in a responsible way. The 
GDC should take into consideration the recommendations from the recent Business at the OECD report 
on implementing the OECD principles5 to help ensure trustworthy AI, and the GDC could reflect some of 
the practical findings from that report to build on the OECD's work and help facilitate principles, 
regulation, and governance frameworks that are both effective and practical.  
 
Governments, through their r egulatory agencies, should explore the implementation of Regulatory 
Sandboxes (RS) to foster the development of new products and services within existing regulatory 
frameworks, as well as Policy Prototyping Programs (PPPs) as methods to test future laws an d regulatory 
frameworks instruments on AI and other emerging technologies. Given the difficulty in assessing the most 
appropriate, feasible, and balanced legislative instruments on a complex topic such as algorithmic 
accountability, PPPs can provide a safe  testing ground to assess different iterations of legislative models 
of governance prior to their actual enactment. An example of this type of collaboration is Open Loop, a 
global strategic initiative by Meta that promotes and deploys experimental regulato ry efforts in the field 
of new and emerging technologies. It supports the co -creation and testing of new governance frameworks 
through policy prototyping programs and enables the evaluation of existing legal frameworks through 
regulatory sandbox exercises.   
Digital commons as a global public good  
It is well acknowledged that no entity or stakeholder group can provide or sustain the internet, 
digitalization, and information society on their own. Work is ongoing to define the respective roles of 
governments, industry, and civil society. However, it has also been acknowledged that the risks and 
threats of using the internet and digital products and services has grown significantly in the past decade. 
To sustain ICTs as a source of economic and societal benefits , it is essential to promote the accountability 
 
5 Business at OECD. “Implementing OECD AI Principles: Challenges and Best Practices.” 
https://www.businessatoecd.org/blog/implementing -oecd -ai-principles -challenges -and-best -practices . 
Meta’s Submission of Inputs to the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
April 2023  
 
9 of all stakeholders – governments, industry, and users – for maximizing the potential of these 
technologies, while doing their part in countering harmful, violent, and hostile activities and trends online. 
Promoting inclusive and comprehensive governance mechanisms and whole -of-society approaches to 
assessing and mitigating risks can help accelerate shared stewardship of the economic and societal 
benefits of ICTs and the emergence of a global vision of digital  commons as a public good. In developing 
the concept of digital commons, we must be cognizant of analogies as the term "global commons" is 
typically used to indicate the earth's shared natural resources and cannot be directly applied to the 
internet, ICT i nfrastructure, and digital products and services that rely on the contributions and innovation 
of humans.  
 
The GDC could offer an opportunity for various entities and stakeholders to develop  a definition, 
framework, and/or vision for the “global digital c ommons'' building on the proposals of the  Tech Envoy 
and ongoing efforts focused on digital public goods. We see at the core of this concept a responsive, co -
designed, co -governed, “safe” space anchored in respect for human rights, which we are striving to  help 
create and protect. Discussion of the ways to create a shared understanding of and approach to global 
commons as a public good should not depart from the preamble of the UN Charter: our shared 
commitment to promoting social progress and better standa rds of life in larger freedom and developing 
digital products, services, and infrastructure for the promotion of the economic and social advancement 
of all peoples.  
 