PERSPECTIVE
LABOUR AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
CHARTER OF  
FEMINIST 
DEMANDS FROM 
THE GLOBAL 
SOUTH 
Anita Gurumurthy and Nandini Chami This charter outlines norma -
tive directions and an action 
agenda for a feminist  approach 
to digital transformation, 
based on wide-ranging 
 consultations with nearly  
100 participants from the 
Global South. 
It calls for key principles of 
digital governance – openness, 
freedom and security – to 
serve as a guide in attaining 
constructive pluralism, equita -
ble and just societies, and 
flourishing futures across  
our planet.
It asserts that the UN Global 
Digital Compact must secure 
state and corporate accounta -
bility for protecting women’s 
human rights in the digital age,   
a new global social contract 
for a socially just digital tran si-
tion, and institutional arrange -
ments  to ensure network and 
data resources become part 
of the commons.A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR 
GENDER EQUALITY 

CHARTER OF  
FEMINIST DEMANDS 
FROM THE GLOBAL 
SOUTH A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR  
GENDER EQUALITY 
With the support of

1Contents
1 INTRODUCTION  2
2 CORE PRINCIPLES FOR A FEMINIST GLOBAL  
DIGITAL COMPACT 3
Principle 1. Openness for constructive pluralism ....................................................... 3
Principle 2. Freedom for equitable and just societies  ................................................ 4
Principle 3. Security for flourishing futures  .............................................................. 5
3 WHAT FEMINISTS SEEK FROM THE GLOBAL  
DIGITAL COMPACT: KEY DEMANDS 6
3.1.  State and Corporate Accountability for Protecting Women’s  
Human Rights in the Digital Age ............................................................. 6
3.2.  A New Global Social Contract for a Socially Just Digital Transition ........... 8
3.3.  Commoning the Internet and Data Resources ....................................... 10

2
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITYto advance “the goals of equality, development and peace 
for all women everywhere in the interests of all humanity” 
(para 3, Beijing Declaration). 
In 2022, IT for Change and Friedrich Ebert Stiftung con -
vened a series of consultations across the Global South to 
co-develop feminist visions of our shared digital future. We 
partnered with the Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and 
Development in the Asia-Pacific region; in the Middle East 
and North Africa, with Access to Knowledge for Develop -
ment Center, School of Business, The American University 
in Cairo; in Sub-Saharan Africa, with Research ICT Africa; 
and in Latin America and the Caribbean, with FES’ Regional 
Trade Union Programme. These consultations involved 
active participation on the part of almost 100 feminist aca -
demics, scholar/practitioners, activists, civil society repre -
sentatives and trade unionists, who debated the normative 
directions and action agenda for a feminist approach to 
digital transformation. Insights from the dialogues have 
been crystallised into this charter of feminist demands from 
the Global South concerning the UN Global Digital Compact.
Grounded in foundational feminist principles of openness 
for constructive pluralism, freedom for equitable and just 
societies, and security for flourishing futures, the charter 
urges the Global Digital Compact to address three central 
demands: 
 –State and corporate accountability for protecting 
women’s human rights in the digital age
 –A new global social contract for a socially just digital 
transition
 –Commoning the internet and data resources  The gender digital divide is not just an access gap; it is a 
democratic deficit that thwarts meaningful participation of 
women and girls in all their diversity in the emerging digital 
paradigm. As welfare delivery and emergency cash transfer 
programmes went “digital by default” with the onset of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, the world’s poorest women and girls 
fell through critical social security nets . Technology-medi -
ated violence also intensified in the post-pandemic period, 
disproportionately affecting  women human rights defend -
ers, women in politics, women in media, LBT women, 
women from ethnic minorities and indigenous communities, 
and women living with disabilities, undermining their 
socio-economic well-being and public participation.  
Accelerated digitalisation of economic activity presents 
both opportunities and challenges. Platform-mediated 
interactions can bring economic opportunities  for periph -
eral geographies and women if public policies and invest -
ments are able to keep pace. However, despite the trans -
formative potential of digitalisation, the mainstream 
platform economy reflects and reproduces gendered exclu -
sions  in labour markets along intersecting axes of geogra -
phy, class, race, and caste. Women who are marginal farm -
ers, informal workers or small producers face exploitative 
working conditions and a livelihood squeeze in digitalising 
global value chains . Although the artificial intelligence (AI)  
revolution does bring exciting prospects to revolutionise 
production systems, the fastest growing and highest paid 
jobs in the emerging AI economy are characterised by a 
wide gender gap . Low-wage work historically dominated 
by women is also most susceptible to technological dis -
placement in the digital revolution . With school closures 
and the switch to remote learning after the pandemic 
expelling girls from education systems , our knowledge 
futures face unprecedented questions about women’s 
meaningful participation and full social citizenship.
Against this backdrop, it is imperative to place the gender 
equality agenda at the heart of the proposed Global Digital 
Compact , as the Generation Equality Forum’s Action Coa -
lition on Innovation and Technology for Gender Equality has 
also urged . The Beijing Declaration (1995)  provides a com -
prehensive normative starting point for such a Compact at 
the global level, underscoring the need for an explicit com -
mitment to harnessing the ongoing digital transition in order 1 
 
INTRODUCTION

3
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY
2
CORE PRINCIPLES FOR A FEMINIST GLOBAL 
DIGITAL COMPACT
The UN Global Digital Compact seeks to outline shared principles for an open, free and secure 
digital future for all. These core principles of openness, freedom and security must be infused with a 
feminist perspective to ensure that the ongoing digital transformation of our economies and societies 
can usher in a gender-just world that is affirming of all individuals and their path to self-actualisation.
PRINCIPLE 1. OPENNESS  
FOR CONSTRUCTIVE PLURALISM
Rationale
Social markers of power are deep-seated in what are 
described as the open spaces of the internet. Instrumentalist 
openness that is agnostic to power will not produce truly 
diverse and inclusive societies. Openness in the digital context 
needs critical engagement with the pseudo-diversity tactics 
adopted by profit-driven platforms, the covert tyranny of 
elitism in open communities, and the alienating subjectivity 
of surveillance societies. Open knowledge cultures in digital -
ity call for a politics of difference that does not flatten the 
reality of social stratification and gender-based exclusion. 
Principle 
The affordances of internet-mediated agoras for open com -
munication and diverse communities must be channelled 
towards gender-transformative knowledge societies that are 
ready to embrace ever-evolving identities and assertions in 
digitality’s fluid spaces. The principle of openness for construc -
tive pluralism will lead to feminist emancipation, empowering 
self-expression, serendipitous solidarity and trans-local publics.
We need safe digital agoras 
that reject the racist and  
patriarchal algorithmic media -
tion of Big Tech platforms. 
– Participant, regional consultation,
  Latin America and the Caribbean 

4
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITYPRINCIPLE 2. FREEDOM FOR EQUITABLE 
AND JUST SOCIETIES 
Rationale 
The architectures of platform life present us with a dazzling 
array of apps that feed an illusion of choice and voice, even 
as the promise of internet freedom is being hijacked for 
private profit. Meanwhile, states eager to quell civic free -
doms have appropriated digital technologies as devices for 
social engineering and control over female bodies and 
labour. The digital revolution and its tendencies to decen -
tralise power and control have been enfeebled. The quest 
for an equitable and just future will remain meaningless 
unless digitality can reverse the feminisation of economic 
precarity, social vulnerability and political marginalisation.  
Principle 
The principle of freedom in digitality implies the ability of 
each and every individual to benefit from the digital par -
adigm and from the expansion of strategic life choices for 
women and girls. Guaranteeing freedom in the digital 
society is not only about eliminating precarity and inequal -
ity, but also entails creating conditions that promote 
autonomy of work and life, universal social security, econ -
omies based on social and solidarity models, and central 
participation of women and girls to shape the digital par -
adigm. Freedom in digitality must lead to maximisation of 
the internet’s public value along with data-enabled intel -
ligence for vibrant, flourishing and democratic societies 
and economies that privilege the role of women as 
socio-political and economic agents. 
In the digital paradigm, we 
need to ensure the overall 
well-being of women. Our 
responses need to straddle the 
public-private continuum.
– Participant, regional 
  consultation, MENA
The infrastructure and capacity to process,  
collect, source and store data needs to 
be widely shared in order to ensure the 
knowledge generated from networked 
data becomes part of the commons.
– Participant, regional consultation, Africa

5
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY
PRINCIPLE 3. SECURITY  
FOR FLOURISHING FUTURES 
Rationale
Co-option of the internet as well as of data, AI and other 
frontier technologies to entrench corporate power has 
besieged people and the planet through structural vio -
lence that perpetuates geographies of neo-colonial 
exploitation. Our societies are in a permanent state of 
attack as our lives, life-worlds, and the environment are 
cannibalised for data extractivism. Trust in global digital 
cooperation is reduced to a narrow, technical idea that is 
ineffective in tackling the dominant digital order’s preda -
tory impulses.
Principle
A secure digital future is one that guarantees the right of 
all peoples to development as human flourishing. There 
can be no just digital transition without respect for plan -
etary boundaries, a global public sphere free from gen -
der-based violence, and an enduring peace without weap -
onisation of cyberspace and militarisation of AI. The 
digital paradigm must be rescued from the destructive 
impetuses apparent in its current trajectory and refash -
ioned towards an egalitarian international order based on 
mutuality and co-implication.It is not enough to talk 
about women’s digital rights. 
We need a feminist econo -
mics to tackle inter-class 
and inter-country struc -
tures of inequality in 
the emerging data and  
AI paradigm. 
– Participant, regional
  consultation, Asia Pacific
It is time to move past the secu -
ritarian discourse of ICT gover -
nance and adopt a people-centric 
approach to digital governance 
that focuses on women’s full 
participation in the digital eco -
nomy and society.
– Participant, regional  
  consultation, Africa 

6
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY3.1. STATE AND CORPORATE 
ACCOUNTABILITY FOR PROTECTING 
WOMEN’S HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE 
DIGITAL AGE
The Challenge
The lurking violence in online spaces is a continuing reminder 
of a brutal and unjust society that renders women vulner -
able to exploitation. The challenge we face in this context 
is not only to address a new space of social interaction called 
the internet. It entails identifying and responding to the new 
relationalities wrought by the intermeshing of the offline 
and online in digital society. 
The human rights frame, therefore, needs to avoid simplis -
tic approaches that view digitality through the prism of the 
offline-online binary  that reduces amelioration and justice 
to individualised remedies . It must identify and acknowl -
edge the emerging structures of gendered oppression in the digital paradigm, offering bold and empowered imag -
inations of new relationalities. It needs to straddle protec -
tion of autonomy and agency (individual and collective) in 
techno-social restructuring of our bodies and lives, pro -
cesses and institutions. 
States have a duty to respect, protect and promote women’s 
human rights, undertaking legal, institutional, policy and 
programming measures appropriate to the digital transition. 
The state-corporate surveillance complex that thrives on 
algorithmic behavioural engineering needs to be dismantled. 
Robust regulation to prevent violation of women’s human 
rights in corporate-controlled global data value chains is of 
critical importance.3
WHAT FEMINISTS SEEK FROM THE GLOBAL 
DIGITAL COMPACT: KEY DEMANDS
A Global Digital Compact rooted in the feminist principles discussed above needs to adopt  
a range of gender-transformative action agendas and intervention strategies elaborated 
below in three specific demands.

7
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY
Checkmating the Digital Corporation Our Demand  
The UN Global Digital Compact must tackle the systemic 
and structural injustices in the digital society and economy 
stemming from the unbridled power and market excesses 
of the transnational platform business model. 
In specific terms, the UN Global Digital Compact must: 
 –be grounded in values, actions and institutions reso -
lutely committed to a gender-transformative digital 
paradigm that advances the rights, dignity and agency 
of all people in all their diversity
 –be founded on a binding global governance frame -
work for a gender-just digital society and economy 
with concrete commitments for actions by state par -
ties and transnational corporations to advance wom -
en’s human rights
 –pave the way for agile local-to-global people-led pro -
cesses to define the place and role of data, AI and other 
frontier technologies for structural transformation
 –provide system-wide guidance on human rights due 
diligence and impact assessments for women’s digital 
rights (with the involvement of the Committee on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the 
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights) 
 –introduce specific measures for inter-agency cooper -
ation, financing and system-wide oversight in order 
to ensure gender transformative outcomes in the dig -
ital paradigm
When national governments have 
regulated Big Tech, it has been done 
to further state control of economic 
development, rather than to ensure 
corporate accountability and protect 
citizens’ rights. This must change.
– Participant, regional consultation, 
  Asia Pacific The greatest paradox of our 
times is that the call for women’s 
inclusion into the connectivity 
paradigm translates into their 
co-option into the matrix of data 
capital. The data economy domi -
nated by Big Tech is exploitative, 
exclusionary and environmentally 
unsustainable, reproducing gen -
der inequalities in all their inter -
sectional dimensions. 
– Participant, regional 
  consultation, AfricaBig Tech companies monopolise creation 
of online content, with algorithms 
prioritising paid and popular content 
that often represents fascist and 
misogynistic viewpoints. Circulation 
of such content is a threat to demo-  
cracy and women’s free expression. 
– Participant, regional consultation, MENA
Big Tech giants and transnatio -
nal corporations controlling digital 
value chains are able to coordinate 
successfully to maintain a global network 
of capital flows for maximising extractivism. 
This is a governance deficit.  Without a su -
pranational body, we cannot monitor and 
check the exploitative excesses of these 
companies in their cross-border opera -
tions or hold them accountable for 
women’s human rights.
– Participant, regional consultation,     
  Latin America 

8
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY3.2. A NEW GLOBAL SOCIAL CONTRACT 
FOR A SOCIALLY JUST DIGITAL 
TRANSITION
The Challenge 
An instrumentalist view of digital technologies as a route to 
social control and market power has spawned an ecologi -
cally destructive and socially untenable world. We run the 
risk of losing ground on precious achievements for gender 
justice. As the UN Secretary-General observed in a speech 
in July 2020 , two seismic shifts could exacerbate inequalities 
in our times – climate change and digital transformation. 
In order to replace the extractive logic of data capitalism 
with a new vision of a socially just digital transition , we 
need a new global social contract that makes a dramatic 
departure from an economistic perspective of development. 
The unsustainable costs of subordinating society and nature 
to the dominant digital paradigm are borne disproportion -
ately by women in the Global South.
Firstly, national policies to grow the digital economy con -
tinue to be guided by a neoliberal data model  that is detri -
mental to local ecologies and women’s livelihood ecosys -
tems, as it is based on exploitative supply chains.
Secondly, as essential digital infrastructures underpinning 
public services increasingly come under private-sector con -
trol, core governance functions become privatised by 
default . This situation gives digital corporations enormous 
clout to shape social and economic policy decisions with 
impunity, even as marginalised citizens’ interests are under -
mined . Furthermore, in the light of digitalisation and cen -
tralisation of government services, women face heightened 
risks of exclusion  from social security systems and are una -
ble to exercise their right to be heard. Lastly, multilateral regimes for development cooperation, 
taxation, trade and intellectual property (IP) present barriers 
that prevent developing countries and least developed coun -
tries (LDCs) from acquiring the appropriate infrastructural 
capabilities for autonomous data-enabled development, 
including socially just and gender-transformative policies.
The existing global trade regime further entrenches  wealthy 
nations’ geopolitical and geoeconomic domination by advo -
cating rules for data flows that impoverish countries of the 
South while tightening the hold of corporations from the 
North over IP in digital innovation. Meanwhile, powerful 
corporations have deployed the rhetoric  of women’s digital 
enskillment as a carrot to induce Southern countries to sign 
up to hegemonic, anti-feminist economic cooperation 
agreements.   
On the one hand, there are no substantive discussions in 
international fora on Official Development Assistance for 
digital infrastructural development and technological coop -
eration except in relation to trade and market access. On 
the other hand, global taxation regimes – even after the 
much-hyped OECD Two-Pillar solution – are unable to pre -
vent digital corporations’ tax evasion practices, which 
impede generation of fiscal resources critical for gender-just 
policies. This results in displacement of social care burdens 
onto women, reinforcing gender hierarchies. 
An inadequate global multilateral system that remains 
impervious to these crises reinforces and perpetuates a dig -
ital infrastructural deficit that exacerbates loss of natural 
resources and gender exclusionary policies in the South. 
There is an urgent need for a new global social contract for 
sustainable and equitable development that is adequate to 
the digital paradigm.

9
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY
Our Demand
The UN Global Digital Compact must steer a shift away 
from the neoliberal policy choices at the heart of the 
extractivist model of datafied development. The socio-in -
stitutional architecture of digitality must aim for a systemic 
quantum shift – respecting the human rights, dignity and 
agency of all people as well as the rights of nature inher -
ently associated with natural ecosystems and species. An 
integrated vision that brings together actions for social 
equity, environmental sustainability and digital justice is an 
urgent priority. The internet and the social resource of data 
and data-based intelligence must be harnessed as a future-
ready force for gender-transformative, ecologically com -
patible development. 
Specifically, the Global Digital Compact must: 
 –demonstrate clarity and alacrity to affirm the twinning 
of human rights and the rights of nature as the basis of 
a new digitality, acknowledging the gendered crisis 
brought on by the current rapacious, socially destruc -
tive and environmentally unsustainable digital order.
 –lay the material foundations for revitalising develop -
ment cooperation towards equitable and socially just 
digital innovation. Global digital cooperation needs a 
well-resourced and dedicated line of funding for a 
new global work programme to equip low- and mid -
dle income countries (LMICs) and Least Developed 
Countries (LDCs) with public digital infrastructure and 
policy development towards gender-inclusive, liveli -
hoods-oriented, and ecologically respectful models. 
The Digital Development Tax mechanism proposed by 
the UN Secretary-General in his 2021 report, Our 
Common Agenda , must be set up and used to finance 
this work programme. 
 –encourage South-South cooperation to strengthen lo -
cally appropriate digital models led by women and 
girls that give due place to diverse forms of knowledge 
and modes of socio-economic organising. 
 – ensure that adequate Official Development Assistance 
is mobilised to double public digital infrastructure in 
developing countries by 2030, while ensuring that 
50% value from the digital economy accrues to the 
bottom 50% nationally and globally by 2030. 
 –validate and make way for alternative platform, data, 
and AI models rooted in social and solidarity economy 
models that are embedded in values of local account -
ability, women’s participation and ecological sustaina -
bility. Achieving the SDGs in a way that affirms that 
people and the planet matter depends on urgent ac -
knowledgment that a laissez-faire digital economy has 
failed women and girls. 
 –provide direction for transforming and harmonising 
multilateral policies on digital trade, taxation, IPR re -
gimes, labour rights in digital value chains, and so on, 
to ensure effective reining in of corporate impunity, 
promotion of political and economic sovereignty for all 
nations and peoples, and carving out of digital econo -
my pathways compatible with gender justice and eco -
logical justice. States need to adopt and enforce feminist 
economic policy measures such as the ILO’s 
5R Framework for decent care work. Wi -
thout this, exploitation of women’s labour 
and unpaid care work in the platform 
economy cannot be stopped. 
– Discussions, regional consultation, MENA
Digital trade agreements use gender 
equality as a decoy to push for open 
digital markets and free cross-border data 
flows. Governance of cross-border data 
flows is reduced to the one-point issue of 
compliance with protection of personal  
data. But what is never discussed is that  
prevailing IP regimes (consolidated 
through these digital trade rules) enable 
dominant corporations to co-opt 
cross-border data flows to con -
solidate their economic domi -
nance of digital value chains.
– Discussions, regional consultation, 
  AfricaSaying No to the Neoliberal Data Model 
Data is now being collected 
from every part of the agricultural 
value chain – Big Agri and Big Tech com -
panies are utilising this data to accelerate the 
expansion of corporate-controlled agriculture. 
Digital greenhouses operated by robot and 
drone systems are dispossessing and displa -
cing agricultural workers and small farmers. 
What if the whole system crashes? Who can 
be held responsible and accountable? 
And how does this square with food 
sovereignty and justice?  
– Participant, regional consultation,
  Asia Pacific 

10
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY3.3. COMMONING THE INTERNET AND 
DATA RESOURCES
The Challenge
The internet as well as data, AI and other frontier technol -
ogies have been primed to entrench the power of financial 
markets rather than ensure democratisation of economic 
and social life. The walled-garden business model that has 
taken over the internet commodifies people, unabashedly 
appropriating their attention and identity for profit.  Gender 
diversity is a crucial input for the data(-hungry) economy, 
as Big Tech corporations draw on their material-discursive 
power to evade responsibility for their data crimes. Digital 
and data rights are still not available to majority populations, 
especially women and girls from the Global South. 
Attempts to use the affordances of digitality for commu -
nity and solidarity have continued nevertheless, especially 
through open-source, open-knowledge, open-data, and 
other open-technology communities, but these enclaves 
remain vulnerable to capitalist cannibalisation  and state 
authoritarianism . Over and above their frequent lack of the 
requisite legitimacy and resources to provide locally viable 
alternatives, they are by and large gender exclusionary  and 
even sexist . 
This demonstrates that we need to take immediate action 
to reclaim the internet as a global knowledge and commu -
nication commons , disavowing surveillance capitalism and 
embracing the generative peer-networking affordances of 
the horizontal  web  of the hyperlink. Rejecting internet platforms’ behavioural surveillance model 
does not necessarily mean entirely negating the optimisa -
tion advantages of data-based intelligence. Instead of an 
economic order that leverages the global internet for cen -
tralised data value creation that benefits a handful of trans -
national platform companies, we should build a feminist 
economic order in which distributed cooperative organisa -
tions produce value from the social commons of data, with 
a view to building feminist economies and societies that 
accord primacy to “mutual (human) support, cooperativism, 
care work, and social and environmental ends”.
The current multistakeholder model of digital governance 
enshrined in the UN system is unlikely to deliver on a peo -
ple-centred democratic governance model for the internet 
and data commons, given the de facto primacy that trans -
national corporations have in these spaces and the ways in 
which they influence policy and its politics through their 
power and might. Corporations guilty of hijacking digitali -
sation for private gain cannot be given pride of place at the 
policy table. That would be an absurd scenario; we cannot 
ask Big Tech to govern itself . A multistakeholder approach 
that is oblivious to the social power in the room is not going 
to redeem gender inequality.

11
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY
Infographic 4. Taking Back the Internet 
and Data Commons Our Demand 
The UN Global Digital Compact should seize the opportunity 
to forge a digital future in which the moorings of democracy 
shift from narrow, state-centric territorial sovereignty to a 
broader people’s sovereignty, supported through the rule 
of law. It must be alert to the possibilities for post-national/
trans-local solidarities and commonsification of productive 
resources that feminist movements have long advocated.
In specific terms, the Global Digital Compact must:
 –provide a new radical basis for governance of the 
global knowledge commons of the internet, to ensure 
that its material affordances can enshrine democracy, 
equity, and the right to participation and community 
for all peoples, especially women who are at the mar -
gins of the digital society. 
 –call for a new approach  to governance of data re -
sources, recognising a) aggregate data as knowledge 
commons, b) the a priori claims that ‘source communi -
ties’ – communities from whose interactions and terri -
tories data is aggregated – have over such commons, 
and c) the equal right of women in stewarding the use 
of community data and obtaining an equitable share 
in its benefits. Such an international politico-econom -
ic data order based on sovereign equality of all na -
tions and peoples must be designed for the realisation 
of human rights in the digital age, including the right 
to development .  
 – must reject the corporate-captured multi-stakeholder 
model of digital policymaking and instead call for the 
establishment of a new, independent UN Body on Dig -
ital Transformation . This new UN body should kick-
start the process of democratic deliberations towards 
building a global digital constitution that will enable 
effective governance of the internet and data com -
mons. It should also guarantee remedies for capture of 
digital resources by powerful corporations and states.
Multistakeholder policymaking has been  
subject to corporate capture and that has  
resulted in digitalisation being framed as an  
apolitical and exclusively technical issue  
without consideration of its impact  
on societies and the planet.  
– Participant, regional consultation, 
  Asia Pacific
Within the data governance policy debates 
in the UN system, one idea that is increa -
singly gaining traction is that the data com -
mons must be governed as a global public 
good, as this will aid open science and inno-  
vation that is beneficial to humanity at  
large. At first glance, this idea seems excel -
lent and in sync with the feminist commit -
ment to preserving the open knowledge 
commons from enclosure. However, there 
is a catch. As long as infrastructural capa -
bilities to mine intelligence from data are 
limited and confined to the hands of a few 
corporations and states, treating data  
as a global public good and allowing it 
to flow across borders without any 
restrictions will only aid capture of 
its value by the powerful.
– Discussions, regional consultation,
  Latin America and the Caribbean

12
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY

ISBN 978-3-98628-362-9
FRIEDRICH-EBERT-STIFTUNG  – A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITYABOUT THE AUTHORS
THE FUTURE IS FEMINISTIMPRINT
Anita Gurumurthy  is a founding member and Executive 
Director of IT for Change where she leads research and 
advocacy on data and AI governance, platform regulation, 
and feminist frameworks on digital justice. Anita is also 
a Board member of global justice organizations such as 
the ETC Group and Focus on the Global South, and Uni -
versity centers such as the Minderoo Tech & Policy Lab 
at the University of Western Australia, and International 
Development and Social Change program of Loughbor -
ough University.
Nandini Chami  is Deputy Director and Fellow of IT for 
Change. She is engaged in research and policy advocacy 
on the regulation of transnational digital corporations 
from the standpoint of indivisible human rights, and 
centering development justice concerns in data governance 
debates. Nandini co-leads the organization’s work track 
on exploring feminist visions for the governance of the 
digital economy.
Project Conceptualisation and Coordination: 
IT For Change & Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung 
Regional partners  
Asia Pacific Forum on Women, Law and Development 
Access to Knowledge for Development Center, School of 
Business, The American University in Cairo
Research ICT Africa 
FES’ Regional Trade Union Project in Latin America and 
the Caribbean
“The Future is Feminist” is a global project of the Friedrich-
Ebert-Stiftung, working worldwide with feminists to develop 
positive visions for a better future that focus on economic 
policy issues and critical economic perspectives. The project 
in particular analyses the effects of digitalization and the 
future of work. It identifies common concerns of feminist 
and labour movements to create space for new powerful 
alliances aiming at social change. The project is a continu -
ation of the work of feminist networks in the Asia and the 
Pacific, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Middle East 
and Northern Africa, and sub-Saharan Africa regions. It 
offers activists the opportunity to exchange ideas on burn -
ing issues, regional experiences and political strategies while 
serving as a space to experiment with new ideas.Published by:
Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung e.V.
Godesberger Allee 149
53175 Bonn
Germany
Email: info@fes.de
Issuing Department: 
Division for International Cooperation,  
Global and European Policy Department
Responsibility for content and editing:
Katia Schnellecke, Gender Justice and Feminism
Phone: +49-30-269-35-7499 
Fax: +49-30-269-35-9246
https://www.fes.de/en/themenportal-gender-  
jugend/gender/the-future-is-feminist  
Commercial use of all media published by the Friedrich-
Ebert-Stiftung (FES) is not permitted without the 
written consent of the FES.
The views expressed in this publication are not 
necessarily those of the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung. 
Commercial use of media published by the Friedrich-
Ebert-Stiftung (FES) is not permitted without the 
written consent of the FES. Publications by the 
Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung may not be used for 
electioneering purposes.
Design and layout: 
Ellery Studio

This Charter outlines normative 
 directions and an action agenda for 
a feminist approach to digital trans -
formation, based on wide-ranging 
consultations with nearly 100 par -
ticipants from the Global South.  
For further information on this topc: 
www.fes.de/themenportal-gender-jugend-senioren/
gender-matters/the-future-is-feministIt calls for key principles of digital 
governance – openness, freedom 
and security – to serve as a guide in 
attaining constructive pluralism, eq -
uitable and just societies, and flour -
ishing futures across our planet.It asserts that the UN Global Digital 
Compact must secure state and cor -
porate accountability for protecting 
women’s human rights in the digital 
age, a new global social contract for 
a socially just digital transition, and 
institutional arrangements to ensure 
network and data resources become 
part of the commons.
A GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT FOR GENDER EQUALITY
