
About.....................................................................................................................................  3
Thematic Areas.......................................................................................................................5
1. Connect All People to the Internet, Including All Schools................................................5
2. Avoid Internet Fragmentation........................................................................................... 6
3. Protect Data........................................................................................................................ 7
4. Apply Human Rights Online.............................................................................................. 9
5. Accountability for Discrimination and Misleading Content............................................. 11
6. Regulation of Artificial Intelligence................................................................................... 12
7. Digital Commons as a Global Public Good....................................................................... 14
8. A Feminist Approach to the Digital Transition.................................................................. 15Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum
CONTENTS
3
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice ForumThe Global Digital Justice Forum is a multisectoral group of development organizations, digital rights networks, trade 
unions, feminist groups, corporate watchdogs, and communication rights campaigners [including, Campaign of Cam-
paigns, Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN), Equidad, ETC Group , Global Policy Forum, Groupe 
de Recherche Pour Une Stratégie Économique Alternative (GRESEA), IT for Change, Just Net Coalition, Latin American In-
formation Agency (ALAI), Oxfam International, Public Services International (PSI), Social Watch, The Centre for Research 
on Multinational Corporations (SOMO), Third World Network , Transnational Institute (TNI)] led by a digital justice vision.
This submission has been co-constructed by the group through the past several months of dialogue, deliberation and 
consultation with several communities in the Global South. It has also been circulated among partners and collabo -
rators of the Forum’s members, and validated by Asociación Latinoamericana de Educación y Comunicación Popular 
(ALER), Foro Argentino de Radios Comunitarias (FARCO), Global Initiative for Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
(GI-ESCR), Internet Bolivia, Internet Ciudadana, and Pressenza.
The group has been working together to build a Global South perspective on digital technologies through policy en-
gagement spanning local to global levels, including UN forums – on Internet and data, biodiversity and environment, 
trade, labor rights, gender equality, development cooperation, SDGs, global governance, multilateral reform, etc.
The work of the group (individually and collectively) over the past two decades – predating the World Summit on the 
Information Society (WSIS) process – is informed by a vision towards and practical action for:
a) democratizing the governance of digital technologies and promoting decentralized digital systems;
b) upholding the Internet as a global commons that can decentralize knowledge and power in our society and 
economy, enabling global exchange of information and knowledge, vibrant peer production cultures, sustainable 
local economies, free expression and association, and democratic deliberation and participation;
c) privileging a people-led, ecologically responsible, non-extractive, rights-enabling and gender-just vision of tech-
nology models that furthers a new international order rooted in development sovereignty;
d) calling for an end to corporate impunity; and
e) developing legal-policy frameworks for data, AI, and platforms grounded in human rights and economic justice 
on both transversal technological aspects and domain-specific/sectoral issues.
The members of the Global Digital Justice Forum consider the GDC as an important milestone that could (as the UN SG 
asserts in his Report to the Commission on Science, Technology and Development) become “an opportunity for Gov -
ernments and other stakeholders to revitalize international cooperation in the light of the dramatic changes that have 
taken place in digital technology since WSIS” (Para 98, A 78/62-E/2023/49).ABOUT
We believe that for this opportunity to materialize, the GDC must unequivocally reject the ‘equal footing’ 
multistakeholder model that has dominated digital cooperation processes, leading to an entrenchment 
of corporate power. Instead, it must build on WSIS outcomes, which still remain valid. The GDC must set 
up a new democratic global digital governance framework founded in a human rights-based constitu-
tionalism that acknowledges the legitimate role of governments in digital policymaking.
The Global Digital Justice Forum sees a strong and central role for civil society and the social movements 
in global to local digital policymaking. As acknowledged by the WSIS, the Internet is a unique artifact, 
and a communication commons belonging to the people of the world. We believe that there is no dig-
ital cooperation without the participation of people in agenda-setting for an equitable, inclusive, and 
development-oriented digital society. The standpoints of those at the margins of society must inform 
processes towards the GDC. The multilateral system and governments need to use the creative potential 
of the Internet to ensure that such participation is not just notional, but as democratized and meaningful 
as possible, so that policies are agile, accountable, and attentive to people and the planet. The so-called 
digital divide is fundamentally a development divide. The commitments of the international community 
in delivering the 2030 Agenda should not be derailed or undermined by or be dependent on digitaliza-
tion. Rather, the GDC must strive to ensure that digitalization is a positive force for the right of all to live 
well with dignity.
The members of the Global Digital Justice Forum, on the basis of their committed engagement on digital 
justice, seek to contribute to the GDC process to co-evolve the norms, principles, and policies for a future 
digitality based on a commitment to the integrated and indivisible human rights agenda, including, the 
right to development, pluralism of knowledges, wellbeing of planet and people, and human flourishing.
Some instances of the work we have done:
•	 Delhi Declaration 
•	 Digital Justice Manifesto
•	 Declaration of Feminist Digital Justice
•	 Food, Data and Justice Dialogues
•	 Digital Colonialism - analysis of EU trade agenda 
•	 Gender-transformative Digital New Deal
•	 Economic Rights in a Data-based Society  
•	 A 20-point agenda towards a just and sovereign digital futureSubmission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum
5
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice ForumSubmission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact
by the Global Digital Justice Forum
Thematic Areas
1. Connect All People to the Internet, Including All Schools
Problem Statement
The current connectivity paradigm led by Big Tech is based on an extractive neoliberal market logic. Its centralized 
server-client model, predicated on behavioral engineering to valorize user attention for private profit, has thwarted 
the empowering potential of the Internet for social transformation. The Big Tech model also comes with unsustainable 
environmental costs – from strip mining of rare earth minerals in conflict zones for development of hardware to huge 
resource requirements and GHG emissions footprint generated by the global data centers of Internet corporations.
Principles
1. Universal, equal, non-discriminatory, quality access to the Internet and data is a human right.
2. Connectivity must lead to a fair, inclusive and equitable digital society and economy that promotes agentic 
participation.
3. Children must not be exposed to unaudited algorithms, as their vulnerability to harm is greater. Such algorithms 
also dilute teacher agency and must be banned in school education.
4. Respect for planetary boundaries and ecological well-being must be a central principle in digital innovation 
systems and infrastructure development.
5. The governance of digital, data, and AI infrastructures must privilege public accountability, community control 
and voices of the marginalized, underscoring both individual and collective rights in relation to the ownership 
and management of digital resources.
Goals
1. To ensure that connectivity results in substantive inclusion and democratization of the Internet’s value proposi-
tions through public financing models.
2. To promote the development of empowering user cultures, critical digital literacy, and meaningful digital en-
skillment, including in schools at all levels.
3. To enable alternative platformization pathways for a just digital transition.
Actions – Multilateral System
1. Introduce a Digital Development Tax for a democratically governed Digital Solidarity Fund: this would entail 
compulsory contributions from dominant digital services firms to finance public digital infrastructure in devel-
oping countries. This can be a pool created from taxes on market share of digital transnational corporations 
(TNCs) (across different Internet services layers) and fees levied on Internet registries for domain name sales 
etc.             
 
6
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum2. Redefine the mandate of international financial institutions to meet the challenges of a new epoch, providing 
assistance to build autonomous platform and data infrastructure which supports digital industrialization in the 
global South. Eradicate tax havens to realize adequate revenues for fairer digital societies.
Actions – Governments
1. Set up and effectively utilize a Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) with gender budgeting to ensure uni-
versal access to the Internet as a public service, including through public access and data allowance programs.
2. Regulate Internet Service Providers to ensure non-discriminatory and affordable access. This includes through 
rules for zero services business models, price caps on broadband services, obligatory private infrastructural 
investment, and a tax on transnational Internet services providers and investors of foreign direct investment 
(FDI) in digital sectors. These measures can support zero-cost access programs in remote, rural and underserved 
geographies.
3. Invest in the creation of digital public goods, and models for connectivity and services involving participatory 
approaches and public-community partnerships.
4. Create a positive regulatory and policy environment for community-owned networks of all kinds, including the 
use of USOF funds.
5. Develop policies and standards, including due diligence guidance for digital services corporations, to eliminate 
algorithmic and ecological harms in digital value chains, and encourage environmentally-friendly digital ser -
vices and innovation.
6. Build critical thinking capacities, digital literacy and media literacy among children and youth, including 
through the public education system, also investing in public digital resources to create a rich learning environ-
ment which is not controlled by for-profit corporations.
2. Avoid Internet Fragmentation
Problem Statement
Big Tech-led standards processes for the embedded Internet, like the Metaverse Standards Forum, further the consol-
idation of the privatized walled gardens of platform behemoths. The WSIS agenda of internationalizing the technical 
governance of Critical Internet Resources remains incomplete, due to the flawed Internet Assigned Numbers Authority 
(IANA) transition process in 2016, with ICANN remaining under US jurisdiction. Also, given the lack of progress towards 
a multilateral mechanism for Internet-related public policy issues, the ‘enhanced cooperation’ agenda from the WSIS 
remains unfinished. Against this backdrop, unilateral actions of governments (for instance, the US-China standoff) 
heighten the risk of a ‘Splinternet’ .
Principles
1. The Internet must be preserved as an open, secure, free and equitable global commons that can neither be en-
closed by private platforms nor misused to undercut human rights and global peace for narrow political ends. 
              
              
             
 
7
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum2. In accordance with the WSIS consensus:
a. A democratic governance framework must be designed for global Internet governance, rejecting out -
right the failed model of ‘equal-footing multistakeholderism’ that has given Big Tech an illegitimate 
seat at the policy table.
b. Sovereignty of state parties on Internet-related public policy issues must be respected in Internet gover -
nance processes at the international level.
Goals
1. To put the WSIS consensus into action (Para 48 of the Geneva Declaration of Principles & Para 70 of the Tunis 
Agenda) for - a) effective internationalization of technical policy issues in Internet governance (pertaining to 
Critical Internet Resources, including, in particular, Internet names and addresses), and b) a separate mecha-
nism for ‘enhanced cooperation’ distinct from the Internet Governance Forum (Para 69 of the Tunis Agenda).
2. To develop binding technology standards based on democratic deliberation at the multilateral level to prevent 
Internet fragmentation.
Actions – Multilateral System
1. Accord jurisdictional immunity to ICANN and rescind the clause in the IANA transition agreement that requires 
its incorporation in the US. Re-incorporate ICANN as an international entity akin to the Red Cross.
2. Revise and expand the International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs) to include binding international 
standards on network-data technologies (such as interoperability, security, personal data protection, quality 
benchmarking etc.) for adoption by all countries, effectively replacing voluntary guidance mechanisms such as 
the ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) focus group on metaverse.
3. Set in motion a plan of action to reaffirm and implement the July 2022 resolution of the Economic and Social 
Council that commits to pursuing enhanced cooperation, as distinct from the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), 
including preparatory guidelines for WSIS+20.
3. Protect Data
Problem Statement
The clickbait model to valorize user attention for private profit has permeated the entirety of the digital services econ-
omy today. Consent frameworks place an unreasonable burden on individuals to be vigilant about their data. Corpora-
tions exploit this to their benefit, including through dark patterns in the design of digital services, nudging users into the 
net of behavioral surveillance. These trends suggest a deep vitiation of the democratic social fabric.
Traditional approaches to data protection that limit privacy harms to non-consensual data processing and re-identifica-
tion of the data subject are not adequate to safeguard individuals and society from data harms. Evidence suggests that 
even without re-identification, there are a host of individual/collective harms that emerge from group profiling (such 
as denial of rightful entitlements in algorithmic sorting of welfare recipients or social credit scoring in digital financial 
services targeted at vulnerable populations).          
              
 
8
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice ForumPrinciples
1. Privacy and personal data protection frameworks must effectively address the erosion of individual, collective 
and societal autonomy arising from a) non-consensual data collection, b) individual and group profiling, c) 
recombination, third party sharing, and downstream processing of anonymized personal data.
2. The digital economy must be effectively regulated to prevent enclosure of the social commons of data resources 
and allowing powerful actor to capture the benefits accruing from it. 
3. The protection of data must include the sovereign right of peoples and communities to own, control, generate 
value, and benefit from their data resources.
Goals
1. To evolve appropriate international and national frameworks to protect people’s right to privacy and data sov -
ereignty.
2. To ensure that the creation of digital public goods/infrastructures at the global and national levels is backed 
by robust safeguards to protect privacy and personal data, enhance autonomy, and promote equitable benefit 
sharing.
3. To ensure that laws and policies for data governance maximize social benefit and curtail market tendencies for 
concentration and exploitation.
Actions – Multilateral System
1. Institute a binding global governance framework in relation to digital human rights, which includes –
a. No-go areas where the data market cannot operate.
b. The right to encryption and freedom from commercial surveillance as integral components of the right 
to privacy. 
c. The right of communities to steward their data resources as an integral part of their Economic, Social 
and Cultural Rights (ESCR).
d. Recognition of state requirements for mandatory general client-side scanning of communication as a 
disproportionate and intrusive violation of privacy (A/HRC/51/17 2022).
2. Update the International Labor Organization’s (ILO’s) Code of Practice on Workers’ Personal Data (1996) in 
dialogue with unions to ensure that privacy safeguards are adequate to worker autonomy in algorithmically me -
diated workplaces. This must address worker data rights, including the rights of unions to access all algorithms, 
freedom from disproportionate data surveillance, the right to explanation and appeal to challenge automated 
decision-making, the right of unions to engage in algorithmic audits, and obligations of employers to negotiate 
with unions on the introduction of surveillance tools.
3. Mandate ex-ante human rights assessments and gender audits – with particular attention to ‘do no harm by 
design’ and ‘data privacy and security principles’ – in the Digital Public Good registry of the UN Digital Public 
Goods Alliance (DPGA).           
 
9
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice ForumActions – Governments
1. Update national privacy frameworks to align with Convention 108 of the Council of Europe, to address the risks 
of individual and collective harms stemming from anonymized data processing, algorithmic sorting, and rank -
ing systems adopted in a range of digital services.
2. Adopt the ‘precautionary principle’ in the development and deployment of all data public goods and AI innova-
tions.
3. Institute robust safeguards of necessity, proportionality, and legitimacy in welfare targeting, and prevent intru-
sive profiling of vulnerable populations.
4. Apply Human Rights Online
Problem Statement
Cyberspace mirrors and amplifies social exclusion and discrimination based on class, race, gender, caste, and other 
axes. The rights of women and less powerful/ oppressed groups are under threat in the digital public sphere due to algo -
rithmic virality and the intensification of hate. Multistakeholder frameworks such as the Christchurch Call have proven 
ineffectual in addressing this.
Social power which characterizes our hybrid existence in the digital epoch cannot be explained through an approach 
that considers the online analogous to the offline. While the values that underpin the human rights approach to a 
humane and just society are abiding, it would be simplistic to equate the rights scaffolding pre-digital life with those in 
the fluid social context constitutive of digital life. Further, the rights of individuals and communities who have no online 
presence are also violated because of data harms arising from digital intelligence held and used by state and private 
actors.
The datafication of our bodies and social interactions requires an imagination of our individual and collective sovereign-
ty to protect both privacy rights in relation to data and democratic governance of data as the new social knowledge. The 
global governance gap in cross-border data flows has reinforced global inequalities, as data resources from countries of 
the South are cornered by a handful of Northern corporations. The human rights framework hence requires an update 
that is adequate to digitality through a new class of rights in relation to data and data sovereignty. 
Principles
1. The digitally-mediated public sphere must be free from all forms of hate speech, racialization, form of social 
discrimination, and violence, including sexism. 
2. The international human rights framework must be updated to incorporate, as appropriate, a new class of data 
rights to protect political, social and economic freedoms in the space of flows.
3. In an interdependent world, the principle of solidarity requires that all countries and peoples have a right to 
benefit from the gains of digitalization. The consolidation of data power in the hands of a few countries and 
their corporations must be addressed through new policy and legal frameworks for data equity and justice.  
              
              
             
 
10
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice ForumGoals
1. To update the human rights framework to accommodate a new class of data rights and ensure accountability 
from state and non-state actors for enforcing these rights. 
2. To bring the multilateral system up to speed on human rights and data governance.
Actions - Multilateral System
1. Adopt a binding consensus to enforce corporate accountability for preventing hate speech and incitement to 
discrimination, hostility and violence in platform environments, including algorithmic content moderation and 
curation.
2. Issue guidance on what constitutes sexist hate speech and technology-facilitated gender-based violence 
through a Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) Committee 
General Recommendation. 
3. Build a data rights constitutionalism that defines new typologies of rights at the intersection of digitalization/
datafication and traditional human rights discourse. This, inter alia, will include the right to data access, the 
right to explanation, the right to be forgotten, the right to be represented (or not) in digital systems, the right 
to participate in decisions about data innovations, protection against all forms of data discrimination including 
unfair denial of citizen entitlements, and workers’ data rights in algorithmic workplaces.
4. Explicitly acknowledge the sovereign right of peoples to govern their data resources towards the progressive 
realization of ESCR, and as an extension of state parties’ right and duty towards development of its people.
a. The UN Convention on the Right to Development being negotiated under the auspices of the Human 
Rights Council (HRC) must recognize the breach of people’s data sovereignty as a violation of their right 
to development.
b. The policy frameworks related to trade, intellectual property, taxation, and international development 
in areas such as health and food systems must be fit to address the inequity of data and AI infrastructur -
al power, and enable the furtherance of open and flourishing digital futures.
5. Mobilize public financing and introduce a new taxation regime to enable developing countries to participate 
equally in the international digital order.
Actions - Governments
1. Adopt a national data constitutionalism rooted in human rights to guide all sectors of the economy and society.
2. Introduce content governance frameworks, including human rights-based benchmarking of harmful content 
that takes into account contextual and intersectional manifestations of hate speech, and establishes corporate 
accountability to protect digital human rights.
3. Invest in digital policy development and public infrastructures to maximize and democratize data capabilities 
and innovation.             
             
 
11
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum5. Accountability for Discrimination and Misleading Content
Problem Statement
The private and closed content streams of mainstream platform models have destroyed the generative web of hyper -
links that is founded on a pluralistic openness. The dominant business model of platforms built on surveillance adver -
tising deploys algorithmic personalization, amplifying and intensifying social bias and intersectional discrimination.
Section 230 of the US’ Communications Decency Act, which treats social media/ digital services platforms as neutral 
conduits, has become a precedent in most jurisdictions. It enables powerful corporations to evade their accountability 
for the proliferation of algorithmic hate and misinformation and escape public scrutiny.
The appropriation of the Internet by state and non-state actors for propaganda has resulted in the weaponization of 
content, feeding authoritarian populism and destroying the social fabric.
Principles
1. The web we want is an open, diverse, equal Internet that promotes the freedom of expression and information, 
media pluralism, and a diversity of knowledges.
2. The independence of public and private media services must be guaranteed to prevent the unjustified removal 
of media content by state agencies or large online platforms. 
3. The defense of platform neutrality must be limited only to Internet intermediaries who do not engage in content 
governance and are neutral to the content they carry (for example, Internet service providers, hosting services 
etc.). Social media and digital services platforms that actively engage in content moderation and curation must 
be held accountable for the content governance actions they perform, including through the deployment of the 
algorithms they own. News media aggregators and online publishers must be governed by publisher liability 
rules to prevent the circulation of harmful content without encroaching on media freedoms.
4. Automated content curation and content moderation systems must be based on human rights frameworks, and 
subject to transparency and accountability. Users must have the right to a) contest the decisions made by such 
systems, b) receive explanations for how tensions or conflicts between different values were balanced (freedom 
of expression vs privacy and so on) and c) seek redressal in case of unfair decisions.
Goals
1. To shift out of a ‘walled gardens’ paradigm to new platform models that are open, secure, interoperable, and 
autonomy-enabling.
2. To overhaul Internet intermediary liability frameworks at global and national levels so that safe harbor protec -
tion for digital services platforms is contingent on the fulfillment of human rights obligations in their algorith-
mic content moderation and curation systems.
Actions - Multilateral System
1. Evolve a binding human rights-based content governance paradigm for the transnational communications 
agora of the Internet that holds states and corporations to account for human rights violations.   
 
12
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum2. Strengthen the proposed UNESCO Guidelines for Regulating Digital Platforms (intended to serve as a model 
code for content governance) by including the following aspects: 
a. Mandatory human rights compliance and periodic due diligence for platforms.
b. Interoperability obligations and a duty of transparency in respect of both algorithmic content modera-
tion and content curation functions performed by digital platforms, and duty to cooperate with public 
audits by independent national regulators.
Actions - Governments
1. Based on a human rights-based intermediary liability framework, set up an independent national agency for 
the effective regulation of automated content moderation and curation systems of digital services platforms 
(whether owned by state or non-state actors) with the mandate to: 
a. Prevent de facto opt-ins into algorithmic personalization, and guarantee data portability. 
b. Review content take down orders by state agencies for impact on user freedoms.
c. Ensure that rules for algorithmic recommendation systems of digital services platforms encode crucial 
public interest values such as media pluralism and diversity, and not just focus on maximizing user pref -
erence and choice.
d. Develop and implement an independent public AI system for automated content moderation based on 
public standards and weightages, which are open to scrutiny and built through public deliberations. 
This should be the ‘reg-tech’ for all public and private digital media services operating in a particular 
context. 
2. Introduce legislation to provide safeguards to digital media publishers against political interference in editorial 
decisions and surveillance. (The proposed EU Media Freedoms Act is a notable development in this regard). 
6. Regulation of Artificial Intelligence
Problem Statement 
AI risk-mapping is guided by an unhelpful long-termism. This, in effect, has seen the proliferation of a discourse of ‘eth-
ical AI’ , which, even if useful, is unable to address the here-and-now damage caused by the concentration of economic 
and political power, and entrenchment of social inequities in the design and deployment of AI systems. The dual-use 
nature and possible misuse of AI technologies in the military domain by states and non-state actors also presents a real 
threat that the multilateral system has not tackled front and center. 
There is a growing gap in technological capabilities between countries that are AI leaders and those lagging behind in 
technological advancement, which is exacerbated by current IP regimes that impede AI development for public and 
social ends. 
Principles
1. No AI is too powerful to evade public oversight. 
2. The ‘precautionary principle’ used in environmental law and used by the EU in its AI regulation must guide the 
13
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forumresearch and deployment of AI systems in all sectors. 
3. Instances of AI use that pose grave threats to peace, security, human and ecological well-being must not be 
permitted at any cost. 
4. The social value of AI must accrue to the communities from whose data footprints that digital intelligence has 
been generated. 
Goals
1. To institute mandatory ex-ante and ex-post assessments of risks to human rights and threats to peace and secu-
rity in relation to specific uses of AI at every stage in their development.
2. To decentralize AI innovation by breaking AI monopolies, and institute public financing mechanisms to build the 
technological capabilities of developing countries for democratizing AI’s economic and social value.
Actions - Multilateral System
1. In line with the precautionary principle, accelerate the formalization of binding regulations on Lethal Autono -
mous Weapons Systems and institute a global ban on non-human control of nuclear weapons platform launch-
es. 
2. Evolve binding common standards and approaches through the development of a common global architecture 
to guide future trajectories of AI design, development, and use. 
3. Reject digital trade rules that prevent nation-states from enforcing transparency and accountability regulation 
on AI services and application providers (such as the prohibition on source code transfer).
4. Reform Intellectual Property Regimes and introduce new licensing systems similar to the creative commons 
regime so that community contributions are recognized in the development of generative AI. For instance, the 
Maori Whare Kōrero Kaitiakitanga License prescribes that derivative products created from linguistic datasets 
co-generated through community contributions must be available for community use and returned to the com-
mon pool.
5. Bridge the AI divide between nations through international public financing initiatives that encourage contextu-
ally appropriate and accountable AI models.
Actions - Governments
1. Mandate compliance with algorithmic accountability and transparency regulation as a precondition for transna-
tional AI service providers to have market access, especially in developing countries.
2. Safeguard transparency and accountability of AI systems through AI accountability legislation. Sector-specific 
guidance for operationalizing rules for various AI applications and services must be issued. 
3. Promote a capabilities approach to digitalization that recognizes investments in techno-institutional infrastruc -
ture and human capabilities as the twin strategies for the AI paradigm.       
             
 
14
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum7. Digital Commons as a Global Public Good
Problem Statement
The multistakeholder model of global Internet governance is riven with multiple conflicts of interest, as private sector 
actors whose profit imperatives clash with the wider public interest are given an equal seat at the policy table. The at -
tempt to create an IGF leadership panel to communicate policy decisions from the IGF to appropriate policy forums goes 
against the WSIS consensus, and has the perverse effect of leading to a situation of Big Tech governing itself. This will 
perpetuate the status quo of corporate enclosure of the Internet commons. 
Global data public goods being created in the UN system (in the health and food systems, for example) lack robust insti-
tutional frameworks that can prevent free-riding and enclosure of their value by powerful corporations.
Unrestricted cross-border data flows impede developing countries from furthering their infrastructural capabilities to 
leverage their data commons for autonomously defining pathways to development.
Principles 
1. The global knowledge commons of the Internet must be governed democratically in order to ensure that the 
social value generated can enshrine democracy, equality, and the right to participation and community for all 
peoples, especially those at the margins of society.
2. Global data public goods being created in the UN system must be backed by robust institutional frameworks to 
prevent free-riding and enclosure of their value by powerful corporations.
3. Data sovereignty is development sovereignty. All nation-states must have the policy autonomy to evolve do -
mestic data governance regimes for their infrastructural development. 
Goals
1. To actualize the right and duty of all nation-states to uphold a democratic global digital governance regime 
through a multilateral, people-centered, public policy mechanism for Internet, platform, data and AI technolo -
gies, free from corporate capture.
2. To develop a new approach to the governance of data which recognizes networked data resources as a knowl-
edge commons. Networked data refers to the aggregate social knowledge continually co-generated by individu-
als through their socio-environmental interactions. 
Actions - Multilateral System
1. Catalyze an institutional process at the UN level to pursue the unfinished agenda of ‘enhanced cooperation’ in 
line with the WSIS Tunis agenda and to check illegitimate TNC interference in the sovereign policy space of state 
parties. 
2. Set up a dedicated institutional mechanism at the multilateral level for access and benefit sharing, akin to the 
Nagoya Protocol of the Convention on Biological Diversity, for fair benefit sharing in global data public goods. 
              
             
 
15
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice ForumActions - Governments
1. Provide key services such as email, video-conferencing, search engines, etc. as public goods, just like postal 
services and basic telecommunication services.
2. Evolve a resource governance regime for the economic governance of data and digital intelligence that is based 
on a common property resource tradition with appropriate guardrails to prevent enclosure.
3. Institute mandatory data sharing obligations on dominant platform companies that have enclosed huge 
amounts of data to tackle anti-competitive practices in the digital marketplace. Reform competition law for 
structural separation of data value chains, in addition to horizontal separation of data service and marketplace 
layers.
4. Ensure that the maximization of data’s public value does not lead to the intensified risk of individual and col-
lective harms. National laws for the economic governance of data must be based on boundary setting so that 
human rights guarantees and community claims in the data commons are not traded away. There must be a 
clear separation of personal data protection regulators from institutional bodies that are entrusted with the task 
of managing common data pools and data exchanges. 
5. Distribute the intelligence value derived from aggregate data resources to the relevant data communities from 
whose interactions or territories the data was originally extracted.
6. Prioritize the use of free, open, and interoperable digital infrastructures in public administration. 
7. Promote alternative platform models, including cooperatives and social enterprises, to enable decentralization 
of data value for vibrant local economies. 
8. A Feminist Approach to the Digital Transition
Problem Statement
An instrumentalist view of digital technologies has resulted in an ecologically destructive and socially untenable world 
that is rife with gendered exploitation, normalization of precarity, and a breakdown of the social contract.
Principles 
1. Make a Southern feminist vision of gender justice a central principle of the Global Digital Compact – see here.
Goals
2. To design a new socio-institutional architecture of digitality that respects the human rights, dignity, and agency 
of all people as well as the rights of nature inherently associated with natural ecosystems and species.
3. To address the lack of a social care infrastructure in the economy of ubiquitous hustling. 
Actions - Multilateral System 
1. Invest in alternative platform, data, and AI models rooted in values of local accountability, indigenous modes of 
knowledge production, women’s participation and ecological sustainability. This can be achieved through the 
STI for SDGs strategy roadmaps and work programs. 
16
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum2. Harness the Internet and the social resource of data and data-based intelligence as a future-ready force for gen-
der-transformative, ecologically compatible development if Agenda 2030 is to be realized. 
3. Reform the international taxation regime to stop base erosion and profit shifting practices of transnational 
digital corporations, in order to enable states in the global South to generate adequate fiscal revenues for social 
care infrastructure.
Actions - Governments
1. Adopt and enforce feminist economic policy measures that apply not only to the world of work, but also recog-
nize the human right to care, redistribute care work from families to public services, and obligate the state to 
provision care systems and services as a public good. The ILO’s 5R Framework for decent care work is an import -
ant starting point. Without this, exploitation of women’s labor and unpaid care work in the platform economy 
cannot be stopped. 
2. Prioritize investments in platform and AI models that address social bias and promote gender equality.
17
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact        Global Digital Justice Forum
