 
Switzerland  
Contribution to the Global Digital Compact  
30. April 2023  
 
 
I. Introduction  
 
Switzerland is convinced that the United Nations provides the appropriate framework to develop a Global Digital Compact in an  open and inclusive process that brings 
together governments, the  private sector, civil society, academia and all other interested stakeholders in a multi -stakeholder approach.  
 
A Global Digital Compact has the potential to strengthen a principles -based order in the area of digital cooperation. We believe that this pot ential can only be harnessed if 
the process is open, inclusive and based on existing work streams and fora. Geneva, with its ecosystem and know -how, is an ideal location for involving all relevant actors 
in the development of a Global Digital Compact and g enerating added value.  The “Messages” from the UN Internet Governance Forum  (IGF)  2022 held in Addis Ababa, 
which focused on the Global Digital Compact  themes, should be especially taken into consideration, as they provide key inputs from the global multistakeholder community.  
Switzerland stands ready to support the Co -Facilitators of the Global Digital Compact, and to work towards the establishment of a  Geneva -based presence of the Office of 
the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology.  
 
The themes foreseen so far are all relevant, and should build on already existing agreements, especially those of the World S ummit on the Information Society  (WSIS)  and 
its outcomes, as well as the outcomes of the WSIS+10 review.  Probably attention should also be given to the intersection between digitalization and climate change, which 
has been discussed inter alia during the UN IGF 2021 (where a report on the matter was produced by a de dicated UN IGF Policy Network). An appropriate follow -up to the 
Global Digital Compact  is essential. Considering its multistakeholder nature and multilateral basis, the UN IGF is best placed for offering a platfo rm for periodic discussions 
and actions related to the follow -up and implementation of the GDC, ensuring ownership of the process by all stakeholders.  The follow -up actions to the Global Digital 
Compact  should build on existing structures, especially the Tech Envoy Office as a focal point within the UN, as well as the UN IGF as central policy discussion and action 
platform, for taking multistakeholder networks to develop and implement the Global Digital Compact  forward.  
 
 
II. Core Principles and Commitments  
 
 
                                                  Inputs  
 
 
Thematic Areas   
Core Principles ( policy inputs / concepts )  
Key Commitments  (ongoing projects, pledges, 
activities ) 
1. Connect all people to the internet, including 
all schools  Connecting the unconnected, especially considering 
the needs of the “bottom billion”  - and particularly 
including those of women and girls to bridge the 
“gender digital divide”  - are essential in order to 
overcome the digital divides.  
 
Meaningful connectivity goes beyond the technical 
means to enable such connectivity by making it 
widely available, but includes  meaningful and 
affordable access,  the acquisition of digital skills, and Switzerland commits to further supporting the efforts 
to address connectivity issues, such as through the 
GIGA Initiative and other efforts undertaken by ITU, 
UNESCO and other UN institutions.  
 
Switzerland moreover commits to further 
international discussions and best practice on 
enabling environments for the deployment of 
broadband, such as the recommendations from the 
 
 
critical digital literacy and awareness, as w ell as 
cultural and solutions. This also implies profound 
changes in the way curricula should be designed in 
schools and in teaching and education as a public 
good. It also implies to ensure the favorable 
framework conditions including the right regulatory 
framework conditions.  
 
True connectivity requires meaningful partici pation 
of all stakeholder groups worldwide to the 
corresponding governance processes and 
institutions.  
 
Moreover, it is important  to foster competition for an 
inclusive digital transformation and promote 
investment and easing infrastructure deployment.  
 
Policy principles that support bridging the digital 
divide,  as listed in this OECD report  
Bridging digital divides in G20 countries | en | OECD , 
need to be taken into account.  
 
 
 
 Broadband Commission  Expert Group on how to 
close the broadband gap . 
 
Switzer land will continue to support the work of the 
Diplo Foundation and its  Geneva Internet Platform , 
which amongst other things offers state of the art 
quality information and capacity development 
resources, including on policies to foster access to 
networks a nd services . 
 
Switzerland will continue to support UNESCO 
International Bureau of Education in Geneva which, 
among other things, is working to steer the 
transformation of education (hybrid education 
learning assessment). The organization is also 
supporting the Education  in Emergency thematic in 
Geneva, among other actors such as the Geneva 
Global Hub for Education in Emergencies.  
 
Switzerland will continue to  support  global efforts to 
bridge the digital divide  by promot ing initiatives and 
projects that enable developin g countries to use 
digital technologies in order to make their economies 
more competitive, integrate them into the global 
production and trade system, reduce barriers to 
market entry, and facilitate access to digital financial 
services for people and busin esses.  This includes for 
example Switzerland’s participation in the Private 
Infrastructure Development Group (PIDG) , which 
supports the financing of internet infrastructure and 
mobile networks, and Switzerland’s participation in 
the UNCTAD E -commerce and D igital Economy 
Programme , which helps policy makers of 
developing countries to create favorable  framework 
conditions and enhance capacities for e -commerce 
by supporting them in identifying and removing 
obstacles to its development.  
2. Avoid internet fragment ation  The best way to avoid Internet fragmentation is to 
continue efforts towards a single, open, Switzerland commits to continue working towards 
the core principles spelled out, and to offer its 
 
 
interoperable, safe, and secure nternet for all 
worldwide.  
 
Free cross -border data flows need to be anchored in 
international law, while taking into account data 
protection needs and avoiding  forced data 
localization policies .  
 
Fragmentation  at the user -layer of the Internet , 
imposition of unnecessary barriers for usage of the 
internet across borders  and imposition of tariffs on 
electronic transmissions need to be avoided by 
working towards common policy standards . 
 
This requires strengthening open, inclusive and 
accountable governance structures, especially 
through further developing an effective, pr oactive 
and politically visible UN IGF.  support in providing a venue and facilitation efforts 
between all interested parties.  
 
Switzerland is actively working  towards anchoring 
the free flow of data and prohibitions to forced data 
localization in its Free Trade Agreement practice and 
multilaterally at the WTO.  
3. Protect  privacy and  data In order to better tap into the social and economic 
power of data while also preventing users from losing  
control over their own data, we should  develop a 
data governance  approach that overcomes the 
supposed tension between data privacy and data 
use, bearing however in mind that the protection of 
personal data and privacy is a fundamental right and 
acknowledging the importance of ensuring high 
standards in this regard .  
 
Digital self -determination aims to be a new approach 
in governing responsible data access, use, re -use, 
management and empowering data subjects in the 
digital age . At its foundation is the idea that 
individuals, companies and society as a whole 
should be able to determine what actions they take 
in our digital ecosystem. This includes giving these 
actors the ability to determine the relevance  and 
value of data that is important to them, to have 
access to and control over this data, and to 
determine how said data is used  and reused .  
 Switzerland commits to further international 
discussions on data governance and to address 
data-related challenges in a horizontal and cross -
sectoral manner in accordance with its privacy and 
data protection legal framework and international 
obligations , including furthering discussion on data 
divides.  
 
Switzerland  commits to promote the development of 
interoperable trustworthy data spaces and to explore 
further processes and policies  to make digital self -
determination a reality.  
 
 
By improving the level of control that individuals and 
organisations have over their  own data, we can 
increase their trust in our data -driven society and 
raise their willingness to share and  make use of data. 
Increased data sharing between different actors will 
increase access and growth opportunities for various 
players and sectors and open up new ways of using 
and combining data. This will lay the foundation for 
developing innovative applications with individual 
and collective  benefits.  
 
Society as a whole should benefit from the efficiency 
gains and innovative potential brought about by data 
– without losing demo cratic control over basic 
societal functions in important sectors. We  therefore 
conceive of digital self -determination as a long -term 
goal.   
 
Trustworthy data spaces show great potential as a 
way of making digital self -determination a reality . 
There is a n eed to promote the development of 
standards for trustworthy data spaces in cooperation 
with existing organisations for norms and 
standardization, and to develop  international 
guidelines for trustworthy data spaces in order 
enable their interoperability and to create legal 
certainty on an international level . 
 
Users and owners of data should have the freedom 
to transfer data across borders and have the choice 
of storage, Forced data localization, which creates 
data insecur ity and infringes on the rights of data 
subjects and owners  should be avoided.  
4. Apply human rights online  The development and use of digital technologies 
should be guided by the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights. States should develop 
effective regulatory and policy responses to the risks 
associated with digital technologies.  
  Switzerland has supported OHCHR’s B -tech project 
from its onset in 2019 and is committed to continue 
its cooperation.  
 
Switzerland is a member  of the Freedom Online 
Coalition since 2019 and Friend of the Chair since 
2020.  
 
 
The Global Digital Compact should build on 
recommendations 3a/b of the SG Roadmap on 
Digital cooperation and be guided by OHCHR’s  B-
Tech Project , that provides authoritative guidance 
and resources for implementing the United Nations 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human rights 
(UNGPs) in the technology space.   
 
Technology companies (and all companies using 
new technologies) should implement human right s 
due diligence (for example through identifying, 
preventing , mitigating  and accounting for how  they 
address  adverse human rights impacts related to 
their products). Effective remedies need to be 
available to individuals and communitie s exposed to 
those human rights risks. Internet freedom and 
fundamental human rights have to be protected 
online.   
Switzerland supports Access Now’s campaign to 
prevent internet Shutdowns and the 2023 
conference on digital rights Rightscon.  
5. Accountability for discrimination and 
misleading  content  Switzerland attaches great importance to the fight 
against  online discrimination and the distribution of 
misleading content.  
 
Online platforms are  beneficial  in many ways: They 
facilitate the finding of information , allow active 
participat ion in public discourse and increase 
diversity in opinions. As such, they contribute to 
freedom of expression  and have become an 
essential feature for democracy.  
 
At the same time, digital platforms have negative 
impacts,  notably when it comes to hate speech and 
disinformation . Their algorithms  determine what we 
read and what we don't even see. This narrows our 
reality and raises questions with regard to 
transparency.  
 
Digital platforms should have their responsibilities in 
ensuring a functioning public communication: They  
need to become more transparent with regards to 
their central processes such as  development and Switzerland commits to support the efforts to 
increase accountability for discrimination and 
misleading content, while protecting human and 
fundamental rights. As such, Switzerland will 
contribute as member of the Catalyst Group to 
UNESCO efforts for an In ternet for Trust.  
 
 
 
enforcement of community standards. Also, they 
should put in place mechanisms for reporting and 
access to redress.  
 
States  have the duty to guarantee freedom of 
expression  as well as other fundamental rights such 
as protection from discrimination. As such, it is 
crucial that a clear framework for  communication on 
digital platforms  is developed and applied . Any 
measures they take to combat hate  speech and 
disinformation  must be consistent with international 
law as well as the protection of fundamental and 
human rights . 
 
6. Regulation of artificial intelligence  Any international regulatory efforts should build on 
existing international law, expanding and 
concretizing it only where necessary.  
 
Wherever possible, any efforts should focus on 
regulating the p otentially negative and undesirable 
effects of AI, and not the "technology" AI per se.  
 
Any efforts should take into account the different 
responsibilities of public and private actors and, 
where appropriate, set specific requirements for 
government use of  AI. 
 
Any efforts should be exemplary in terms of human 
rights, democracy and the rule of law and strengthen 
these. At the same time, they should also emphasize 
the opportunities of AI and be designed in such a way 
that they promote innovation and do not " stifle" it.  
 
Any efforts should not only focus on a prior ("ex -
ante") risk assessment of the applications of AI, but 
also include impact assessment considerations.  
 
Implementation mechanisms: To guarantee their 
effectiveness, any efforts should provide for  
implementation mechanisms. States should be given Switzerland took part in the elaboration of the 
UNESCO Recommandation on Ethics of AI.  
 
Switzerland, in the person of Ambassador  Thomas 
Schneider,  chairs the Council of Europe's 
Committee on Artificial Intelligence, which aims to 
negotiate a framework convention on artificial 
intelligence, human rights, democracy and the rule 
of law . The convention is intended  to reach a 
maximal number of States, beyond those that are 
members of the Council of Europe . 
 
Switzerland is supporting the AI for Good Global 
Summit of the ITU which will take place in July 2023 
in Geneva.  
 
 
as much leeway as possible in designing national 
mechanisms.  
 
Any efforts should make use of internationally 
recognised methods following recommendations 
from competent organisations, good practices, or 
international standards.  
 
Any efforts should promote digital self -determination 
in order to enable the protection and control of one’s 
own data protecting  while at the same time enabling  
data use and thereby  innovation .  
 
Human rights, the rule of law and the overall impact 
and systemic risks of AI on democracy and the wider 
society should be considered.  
 
As long as research is in accordance with human 
dignity, human rights and fundamental freedoms, no 
unnecessary requirements should be imposed on 
research and science so that they can reach their full 
potential for the benefit of society.  
 
Any process should be inclusive and transparent and 
should involve all interested and relevant 
stakeholders.  
 
Gender equality is a priority for Switzerland. 
Switz erland is therefore committed to ensuring that 
the gender equality perspective is maintained and 
upheld throughout any efforts.  
7. Digital commons as a global public good  Regu lation for digital content platforms should  ensure 
information as a public good, while preserving freedom 
of expression and other human rights, as well as other 
relevant international commitments and obligations . 
 
Building on the idea to expand, rather than restrict 
access to data, information, culture and knowledge, the 
concept of digital commons supports and taps into the 
long-term goal of digital self -determination.   Switzerland is part of the Catalyst Group of UNESCO's 
Global Conference Internet for Trust  
 
 
Other areas  In general terms, the GDC should build on the 
agreements of the World Summit on the Information 
Society and its outcomes, as well as the outcomes 
of the WSIS+10 review.  
 
An appropriate follow -up to  the GDC  through existing 
structures  is essential. Considering its 
multistakeholder nature and multilateral basis, the 
UN IGF is best placed for offering a platform for 
periodic discussions and actions related to the 
follow -up and implementation of the GDC , ensuring 
ownership of the process by all stakeholders . 
 
The follow -up actions to the GDC should build on 
existing structures, especially the UN IGF as central 
policy discussion and action platform, for taking 
multistakeholder networks to develop and impl ement 
the GDC forward. Follow -up actions can well be 
channeled through WSIS structures, such as WSIS -
Forum and the WSIS Action Lines, updated as 
appropriate.   
 