  Microsoft’s Input 
to the Global 
Digital Compact 
Consultation
April 2023
  2
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationIntroduction  
Microsoft’s mission to empower every person and every organization on the planet has 
never been more urgent. We need to deliver innovation that helps drive economic growth. 
But as we drive growth, we must also commit to creating a future for everyone. To do this, 
we focus on supporting inclusive economic growth, protecting fundamental rights, creating 
a sustainable future, and earning trust. 
We believe digital technologies can be a positive force in the world and accelerate progress 
on the Sustainable Development Goals . However, we know that no one company, industry, 
or country can solve these challenges alone. That is why we work across sectors and borders 
to foster collective action and amplify impact, driving progress faster and farther than we 
could on our own. 
Microsoft was therefore glad to have the opportunity to respond to a public consultation on 
a proposed Global Digital Compact that the UN Secretary-General hopes will “outline shared 
principles for an open, free and secure digital future for all.” 
The consultation  invited comments on seven areas identified in paragraph 93 of the 
Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda report . It also invited respondents to suggest 
another area of focus that the Compact could have. For all these areas, the UN wanted to 
hear views on: 
• core principles that all governments, companies, civil society organizations, and other 
stakeholders should adhere to;
• key commitments to bring about these specific principles. 
This consultation response shares Microsoft’s initial contribution to this important exercise to 
leverage the perspectives and expertise of stakeholders on the path toward a Global Digital 
Compact to be adopted by all UN Member States. We look forward to continuing to engage 
in discussions as they evolve.
3
 
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact Consultation3
Table of Contents
Reaffirm the commitment to connect all people to the  
internet, including all schools ............................................................ 4
Avoid internet fragmentation   ............................................................ 6
Protect data ............................................................................................. 8
Apply human rights online ................................................................. 10
Accountability criteria for discrimination  
and misleading content ....................................................................... 1 2
Regulation of artificial intelligence ................................................... 14
Digital commons as a global public good ...................................... 16
Other areas: Multistakeholder and multidisciplinary  
approaches to digital cooperation ................................................... 18
  4
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationReaffirm the commitment 
to connect all people to the 
internet, including all schools
Core principles
The Global Digital Compact should acknowledge that affordable 
access to meaningful connectivity is now a necessity and should 
be considered a fundamental human right. 
Broadband is the electricity of the 21st century, fueling economic and social opportunities, 
whether improving outcomes in education and healthcare, starting or growing a small 
business, providing access to clean drinking water, or adopting ecologically sustainable and 
financially successful farming practices. As noted by the International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU) “[a]chieving universal and meaningful digital connectivity - the possibility for 
everyone to enjoy a safe, satisfying, enriching, productive and affordable online experience - 
is key for enabling digital transformation.” 
However, for billions of people around the world, these opportunities remain out of reach 
simply because they can’t access or afford a high-speed internet connection. ITU data show 
that 2.7 billion people—or one third of the world’s population—remained unconnected to 
the internet in 2022 , either because it’s not available or they cannot afford it. In addition, 770 
million people lack access to electricity, and a billion more have only sporadic, unreliable 
access to electricity—a prerequisite for powering networks and devices. These challenges 
disproportionately impact the less developed regions of the world, but they also persist in 
developed markets. 
The freedom to learn and interact with the world requires access to the global network that 
today shapes human communication. For every person on the planet to reach their full 
potential, access to meaningful connectivity must be recognized as a fundamental human 
right in order to drive inclusive economic opportunity and accelerate efforts to close the 
global digital divide once and for all. 
For connectivity to be meaningful, both access to the internet, and the devices used to 
access it, need to be affordable. In addition, people need to be equipped with the necessary 
digital skills to use connectivity, as a foundation for empowerment and digital transformation 
across the world. This should include skills and training necessary for pursuing in-demand 
jobs, including in the important field of cybersecurity and in relation to AI.
  5
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationKey commitments to bring about these core principles 
To achieve this vision, governments, international organizations, companies, civil society 
organizations, and others must all be involved. We support the UN’s set of aspirational 
targets for 2030  to help prioritize interventions, monitor progress, evaluate policy 
effectiveness, and galvanize efforts around achieving universal and meaningful connectivity 
by the end of the decade, including to reach 100 percent of households and schools with 
internet access by 2030.
Another important target is digital gender parity, with ITU data continuing to show a gender 
gap in internet use. Gender equality, besides being a fundamental human right, is essential 
to achieving peaceful societies, with full human potential and sustainable development, as 
well as to spur productivity and economic growth.
As our primary contribution to these goals, Microsoft has expanded our Airband initiative 
through new partnerships with local and global partners to extend internet coverage to 
250 million people globally by the end of 2025, including 100 million people in Africa . 
Accomplishing these aggressive goals will need to leverage public-private partnerships, such 
as Microsoft’s agreement with Liquid Intelligent Technologies in Africa , which will involve 
middle-mile broadband providers, local ISPs for last-mile connectivity, energy partners, 
international organizations, and local governments. It is also vital to use all available 
technologies to deploy networks and fill in the gaps of the hardest to reach communities—
Microsoft’s approach is to use technologies based on what is best for a particular 
community, whether that is fixed wireless, satellite, TV white spaces, fiber, or Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS). To enable Microsoft and others to make these great 
strides, we call on governments, regulators, and international organizations to promote and 
enact policies that allow for and encourage the building of networks that leverage a hybrid 
mix of technologies.
Microsoft has also made a number of commitments in relation to skilling, notably a 
commitment via the ITU’s P2C initiative to train and certify 10 million people with in-demand 
digital skills by 2025 , and an initiative across 26 countries to increase cybersecurity skills for 
women and job seekers . As a part of that, Microsoft is partnering with the OECD in support 
of a detailed study  that analyzes the cybersecurity skills gap and presents strategies to grow 
cybersecurity workforces through secondary education and training.
  6
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationAvoid internet fragmentation
Core principles
The Global Digital Compact should recognize the importance 
of trusted cross-border data flows and regulatory 
harmonization as indispensable tools to support growth, 
innovation, and cybersecurity. 
Governments have a vital interest in protecting the privacy, safety, and security of their 
citizens. Managing the flow of data and sensitive information across borders is an important 
tool in ensuring these protections. However, isolating data within physical borders can 
effectively fragment the internet, preventing individuals, businesses, and governments from 
realizing the full economic and societal benefits of digital transformation. And as jurisdictions 
develop different approaches to content regulation, users in different countries may have 
differing access to information, with consequent impacts on the free flow of ideas and 
communications between countries.
Individuals rely on data flows to access health, education, and other essential services, 
particularly in communities with limited local services, where digital services can enhance 
inclusion. Organizations of every size and in every corner of the world depend on the flow 
of data across borders to deliver these services. Data enables innovation, productivity, and 
economic development by enabling trade and the exchange of knowledge on a global 
scale. Data flows also foster cooperation between countries on common challenges such as 
climate change and disaster response. 
Cross-border data flows strengthen cybersecurity and provide resilience to destructive 
attacks, as demonstrated in Microsoft’s report on early lessons from the war in Ukraine . 
Cyberattacks are often transnational and fast-moving, so cybersecurity requires swift and 
effective data sharing on a global basis and the ability to disburse digital assets into a global 
cloud. Preventing such data transfers hampers necessary international coordination and can 
lead to greater threats to security and privacy. 
Governments should therefore support international legal frameworks that enable 
trusted cross-border data flows; resolve conflicting laws related to data access, privacy, 
safety, and sovereignty; and allow governments to request data through a transparent 
process that abides by internationally recognized rule of law and human rights 
standards. Regulatory harmonization, the development of standards, and international 
legal frameworks are key to resolving potential conflicts and securing strong data 
protection and the free flow of information. 
  7
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationKey commitments to bring about these core principles
Microsoft advocates for laws, regulations, and international agreements that keep data safe 
and respect sovereignty. This includes support for the development of strong, interoperable 
national privacy laws that engender customer trust. We also support the development of 
practical, risk-proportional, and harmonized approaches to content regulation.
In 2022, Microsoft and other cloud service providers committed to Trusted Cloud Principles  
to protect the rights of our customers. In setting out these principles, we seek to partner 
with governments to resolve international conflicts of law that impede innovation, security, 
and privacy, and to establish and ensure basic protections for organizations that store and 
process data in the cloud. There are three fundamental tenets that could be enshrined in the 
Global Digital Compact: 
• We recognize the interest of governments around the world in protecting the safety, 
security, privacy, and economic vitality of individuals and organizations
• We recognize that international human rights law enshrines a right to privacy
• We recognize the importance of customer trust and customers’ control and security of 
their data
Microsoft also supports multilateral efforts to facilitate transnational data flows, such as the 
OECD Declaration on Government Access to Personal Data Held by Private Sector Entities , as 
well as bilateral and regional agreements and mechanisms that foster trusted data flows. The 
OECD Declaration was a major achievement that builds an important foundation for other 
international agreements which will help governments protect public safety and national 
security while maintaining trust in global technology.
Rules governing international data transfers should be aimed at ensuring that personal 
data remains sufficiently protected, no matter where it goes. Criteria and requirements 
for international data transfer mechanisms should be designed to tackle specific risks to 
data with thoughtful and purposeful rules, rather than broad restrictions that may not be 
necessary in a given circumstance. These mechanisms should be regulated in ways that 
promote good data protection behavior by the controllers and processors that have been 
entrusted to protect and respect data subjects’ personal data. 
  8
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationProtect data
Core principles
The Global Digital Compact should underline the important 
principles of transparency, consumer empowerment, corporate 
responsibility, and strong enforcement. 
Privacy is a fundamental human right, and strong data privacy laws are vital for safeguarding 
it. This right is more important than ever with the growth in the volume of data in our world 
and its importance in our lives. This growth in the collection and use of personal data has 
heightened concerns about its protection. To build trust in technology, we need strong data 
privacy laws that place accountability where it belongs—on the organizations that collect, 
store, and process data.
As the number of privacy laws increases, so does the importance of interoperability. Clear, 
consistent rules across jurisdictions reduce compliance complexity, promote accountability 
for responsible data practices, and help ensure that everyone’s privacy is protected 
regardless of location.
Creating a framework of trust—both for government action and corporate accountability—
should begin with these four principles:
• Transparency  about how companies collect, use, and share personal information. 
Consumers should understand what data companies have and how they will interact with it.
• Consumer empowerment,  which guarantees the right of individuals to access, correct, 
delete, and move personal information.
• Corporate responsibility  that requires companies to be good stewards of consumer 
information.
• Strong enforcement  through regulators that have sufficient authority, tools, and funding 
to enforce legal requirements and take meaningful action.
Key commitments to bring about these core principles
Microsoft believes the following four principles should also be taken into account by the 
private sector in relation to protecting data. 
  9
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact Consultation1. Companies should be transparent about the data they collect and how they use it
Microsoft demonstrates transparency through the Microsoft Privacy Statement , which 
explains the personal data Microsoft processes, how we process it, and for what purposes. 
Our biannual digital trust reports  share how Microsoft responds to government and law 
enforcement requests for user data and user requests to remove content. In addition, the 
biannual Microsoft Privacy Report  describes changes to our data collection including any 
new requirements.
2. Companies should empower customers to control their data
Acknowledging the global relevance of the rights at the heart of the GDPR, we believe 
these rights should apply to all our customers wherever they live. Microsoft enables all our 
customers around the globe to control the data we collect through our privacy dashboard .
3. Companies should protect customer data
Microsoft does not give any government direct or unfettered access to data, and we will not 
disclose it to a government except as customers direct or where required by law. We also 
make legal commitments to defend customers’ data. Our Defending Your Data program  
ensures that requests by all governments for our commercial and public sector customers’ 
data meet expectations that access is necessary and proportionate. We challenge—including 
in court if necessary—inappropriate government access requests, and we provide redress 
to our customers’ users who may be affected. Microsoft also offers robust protections for 
customers, including: 
• Strong encryption of data in transit and at rest in Azure , Office 365 , and Dynamics 365 . 
• Azure Confidential Computing , a fully encrypted runtime environment for processing.
• Customer Lockbox for Azure and for Office 365 , which helps customers manage access 
to their data and track activity through audit logs.
• Managed Encryption Keys, which enables customers to use their own encryption keys to 
protect data within Azure  and Microsoft 365 . 
4. Companies should support regulation
Microsoft supports strong privacy regulation , and we encourage greater dialog between 
technology companies, governments, and other stakeholders on meaningful guardrails for 
data protection. 
  10
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationApply human rights online
Core principles 
The Global Digital Compact should underline the importance 
of international human rights laws, principles, and norms, 
which set out duties and responsibilities to guide the actions of 
governments, companies, and others. 
The online and offline spheres in today’s world are inextricably intertwined. Online 
technologies should be used for the good of humanity, to empower and protect everyone, 
and to leave no one behind—online or offline. We believe that people, organizations, and 
societies will only use technologies they trust, and they will only trust technologies that 
respect their rights and advance human dignity, agency, and wellbeing.
To that end, governments, companies, civil society organizations, and other stakeholders 
should be guided by international laws, principles, and norms, including the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights , the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights , and the work of the United 
Nations on good governance and the rule of law . 
Key commitments to bring about these core principles
As set out in the Microsoft Global Human Rights Statement , respecting human rights is a 
core value of the company. It is inseparable from our mission to empower every person and 
every organization on the planet to achieve more with our technologies. 
We conduct due diligence to assess the impact of our technologies on human rights. We 
look to international principles and norms such as the UN Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights  to guide our diligence. We use what we learn from stakeholders to 
challenge our thinking, develop and refine our policies and practices, mitigate risks,  
and improve our technologies and how we provide them to fulfill our commitment to 
human rights.
  11
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationIn relation to exercising human rights due diligence, it is important to note the roles of both 
governments and companies. Under the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, companies have a responsibility to respect human rights and should conduct human 
rights due diligence to assess the impact of their technologies on human rights. 
In fulfilling the state’s duty to protect human rights, many stakeholders are encouraging 
governments to commit to conduct, and in practice conduct, timely human rights due 
diligence (HRDD) and human rights impact assessments (HRIAs) when the state (1) 
regulates digital technologies and/or (2) deploys digital technologies. They also encourage 
governments to incorporate timely, meaningful, and transparent multistakeholder 
consultation in such HRDD and HRIAs. 
Finally, to put international human rights laws, principles, and norms into practice in digital 
technologies, governments, companies, civil society organizations, and other stakeholders 
should commit to multistakeholder dialogue and collaboration to share knowledge, 
perspectives, ideas, and solutions, and forge consensus on how digital technologies could 
and should be used in a society that protects and advances human rights.
  12
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationAccountability criteria for 
discrimination and misleading 
content 
Core principles
The Global Digital Compact should call for stronger 
international norms to protect against malicious information 
operations and create a standard of behavior for nation-state 
information campaigns. 
Microsoft is committed to helping people use technology to overcome discrimination, 
exclusion, or oppression. Ongoing information operations pose a threat to health, safety, 
and democracy, eroding trust in critical institutions by creating doubt, distrust, and dissent 
in targeted, marginalized, or underserved communities. The ability for our adversaries to 
create cyber-enabled information operations through technological advances has increased 
the scope, scale, and efficiency of campaigns. The Global Digital compact should encourage 
further clarity regarding what’s intended by “discrimination” particularly in the context of a 
healthier information ecosystem and the impact of information operations. 
Microsoft is dedicated to supporting a healthy information ecosystem that empowers every 
person and organization where trusted news and information thrive. Microsoft’s June 2022 
Early Lessons from the Cyber War report  established the Information Integrity Principles that 
outline how we approach information operations:
• Freedom of expression:  We will respect freedom of expression and uphold our customers’ 
ability to create, publish, and search for information via our platforms, products, and services.
• Authoritative content: We will prioritize surfacing content to counter foreign cyber-influence 
operations by using internal and trusted third-party data on our products.
• Demonetization: We will not willfully profit from foreign cyber-influence content or actors.
• Proactive efforts: We will proactively work to prevent our platforms and products from 
being used to amplify foreign cyber-influence sites and content.
Microsoft also created a national security whole-of-society approach to counter these 
information operations, which we call “The Four Ds”:
  13
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact Consultation• Detect: Hunt, track, and investigate foreign perpetrators of information operations.
• Disrupt: Leverage threat intelligence to disrupt cyber-influence operations. 
• Deter: Seek to strengthen and extend international norms to protect against the impact of 
these operations and create a standard of behavior for nation-state information campaigns.
• Defend: Build consumer-facing technology with information integrity as a key principle 
and foster innovation and research to enable more responsible technology. 
Key commitments to bring about these core principles
Microsoft is developing tools and multistakeholder partnerships to combat the ongoing 
plague of information operations. For instance, we have partnered with trusted third parties 
like NewsGuard to empower our product teams to take additional actions to promote 
authoritative information and provide a more trusted experience to our customers. In 
addition, Microsoft is a founding member of the Coalition for Content Provenance and 
Authenticity (C2PA) , which launched an open-source content provenance standard in 2022. 
Microsoft recently announced a new provenance platform to authenticate images  with our 
partners at Truepic.
We are increasingly analyzing the intersection between cyberattacks and influence 
operations. In June 2022, Microsoft published the aforementioned intelligence report 
Defending Ukraine: Early Lessons from the Cyber War  and a follow-up  report in March 
2023 on ongoing cyber-enabled Russian operations . These reports unveiled detail about 
sophisticated and widespread Russian foreign influence operations being used to undermine 
Western unity and bolster Russian war efforts. 
An important element in ensuring information integrity is fostering information literacy and 
access to trusted sources of information . Beginning in July 2022, we have been donating 
in-kind advertising space across Microsoft platforms to promote information literacy 
campaigns and help online users develop tools and skills to consume information critically 
and analytically. In 2022, Microsoft partnered with the News Literacy Project to launch three 
ad campaigns across Microsoft platforms, which garnered over 70 million ad impressions 
by Microsoft users. In addition, Microsoft has partnered with Verified, an organization co-
founded by the United Nations and Purpose, to fund the development and dissemination of 
a Spanish-language course  focusing on increasing awareness of disinformation tactics and 
tools and building skills in vulnerable audiences in Latin America. Often communities without 
access to local news sources are further marginalized and possibly susceptible to targeted 
information operations. That is why support to independent trusted sources of local news is 
critical. Microsoft recently announced an investment in the viability of newsrooms across the 
world  with our partners at InterNews and USAID. 
  14
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationRegulation of artificial intelligence
Core principles
The Global Digital Compact should call on governments, civil 
society, and industry to come together to ensure that laws, 
norms, and standards are in place to guide responsible and 
ethical use of AI. 
AI presents huge opportunities for society, offering the potential to help address major 
societal challenges and drive breakthroughs in productivity, healthcare, scientific discovery, 
and sustainability. However—like every technology before it—some will turn this advance 
into both a tool  and a weapon, and there are risks that must be addressed. 
Transformative technologies like AI require new rules of the road. Proactive, self-regulatory 
efforts by responsible companies will help pave the way for these new laws, but not all 
organizations will adopt responsible practices voluntarily. Countries and communities will 
need to use democratic lawmaking processes to engage in whole-of-society conversations 
to ensure that people are protected.
Informed by our internal work to identify and address AI risk, we believe regulation should be:
• Risk-based:  focusing resources and safeguards on the highest risk applications.
• Outcomes-focused: setting out what regulated actors must achieve rather than how 
they achieve it will help frameworks remain relevant and effective in the face of rapid 
developments in AI technology and responsible AI practice.
• Adaptable and aligned to international norms and standards: aligning to 
international norms and standards, including the important work of the  OECD , so that 
organizations can collaborate across borders and the benefits of this technology can 
be spread as broadly as possible. 
Key commitments to bring about these core principles
Although the potential of AI is significant, there are concerns that AI may undermine 
information integrity, exacerbate bias and inequality, and harm jobs, education, and the 
environment. As a company developing and deploying this technology, Microsoft is 
committed to working with others to ensure AI is: 
• built and used responsibly and ethically
• advances international competitiveness and national security, and 
• serves society broadly, not narrowly
  15
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationWe support multistakeholder efforts to advance responsible AI, including the Rome Call 
on AI Ethics  and UNESCO’s Recommendation on the Ethics of AI , both important initiatives 
that can help realize the important principles outlined above.
Microsoft continues to build out our responsible AI program , investing in research, policy, 
and engineering so that our systems are designed to perform fairly, accurately, and safely. 
Advancing transparency and ensuring humans remain accountable for the performance of 
AI systems is core to this work. So too is ensuring that our AI work continues to build on 
our strong foundation in privacy, security, accessibility, and digital safety.
Microsoft’s AI for Good program  provides technology and resources to empower 
organizations working to solve global challenges to the environment, humanitarian issues, 
accessibility, health, and cultural heritage. This includes work related to preparedness for 
disaster response and the use of satellite data imagery to enable sharing of information 
with governments, NGOs, and other stakeholders.
We will continue to share what we learn  and seek feedback from our stakeholders. A 
recent example of this is our publication of Microsoft’s Responsible AI Standard  (that 
guides how teams at Microsoft build and use AI), Impact Assessment template , and guide .   
  16
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationDigital commons as a global 
public good
Core principles
The Global Digital Compact should recognize that opening, 
sharing, and collaborating around data can help us make better 
decisions, improve efficiency, and tackle some of the world’s 
most pressing societal challenges.
Making trusted digital resources more accessible to all members of society is a key factor in 
providing broad and equitable access to the opportunities of modern technology. 
Many of the big societal challenges of our time, from climate change to the COVID-19 
pandemic, are too vast and too complex for any single stakeholder to address alone. There 
is a synergistic effect in sharing ideas. This is particularly the case for data, which can become 
considerably more valuable when combined with other datasets leading to new, unexpected 
insights. We believe that everyone can benefit from sharing digital resources in a manner 
that facilitates and strengthens collaboration across stakeholders to make better decisions, 
improve efficiency, and gather new insights.
Microsoft has adopted the following principles to inform how we open and share data in a 
responsible way:
• Open and accessible:  It should be open to anyone in the community who wants to 
advance work and initiatives in support of addressing societal challenges.
• Encouraging use and collaboration:  Digital goods should be easy to find, easy to share, 
and easy to use.
• Empowering: Open data models, standards, open source software, and other digital 
assets should be selected with the purpose of empowering community stakeholders, 
and they should be accompanied by content and opportunities to develop the talent 
of the community.
• Secure: Security controls should be employed to ensure that data and tools are 
operationally secure where desired, that sovereignty is maintained where required, and 
that governance structures are in place to maintain trust across stakeholders.
• Protecting privacy: The community stakeholders should have tools and processes in 
place to help organizations protect individuals’ privacy and identify potential risks.
  17
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationKey commitments to bring about these core principles
To ensure the benefits of opening, sharing, and collaborating around data, we have made 
commitments in the following five areas:
1. Open data: The amount of data in the world is growing exponentially, but access to the 
potential value from this data is not. Focus on improving access to data is needed to 
help address the looming data divide where a small number of companies and countries 
have access to the majority of the data that fuels today’s technological advancements. As 
such, we will continue our Open Data Campaign , enable access to data sets that can help 
address societal challenges, and deepen our collaboration around data with others. This 
includes collaboration around open data and digital public goods—we all have a role 
in advocating for, and contributing to, curated libraries of open data and open source 
GovStack digital public goods. 
2. Tools to make data usable: Easy access is required for data resources to serve as 
a global public good, but making data accessible is not sufficient. To facilitate the 
adoption and use of open data, we will provide tools to make it easier to curate, share, 
and consume data in a manner that is aligned to data standards and is secure, privacy-
respecting, and intuitive. 
3. Open source software: Microsoft has a long history of supporting the open source 
community and will continue to provide tools for people to share and use open source 
software on GitHub as well as to make a wide range of our own internal solutions and 
projects available as open source projects. We strongly believe that partnerships are 
necessary to accelerate open source GovStack digital public goods. 
4. APIs and services: Microsoft makes a wide range of APIs, services, models, and technical 
infrastructure available for the worldwide developer community to use. We also provide 
no-code and low-code capabilities that allow a much broader range of people and skills 
to engage with technologies like AI.
5. Skilling and learning: We provide skilling and learning programs that are free or 
affordable, readily accessible, and adapted to fit the context of learners in many cultures. 
We commit to providing in-kind digital advisory services and technical assistance 
through a dedicated Tech for Social Impact Digital Development program focused on 
LDCs.
Microsoft also published A new Open Data for Social Impact Framework , which builds 
upon initial lessons learned from our Open Data Campaign, and includes practical 
recommendations on how to apply these lessons to an organization’s data strategy.
  18
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationOther areas: Multistakeholder 
and multidisciplinary approaches 
to digital cooperation 
Core principles
The Global Digital Compact should recognize the value 
and importance of multistakeholder approaches to digital 
cooperation, including in the manner in which the Compact itself 
is developed.
Many of the most pressing global challenges can only be addressed effectively through 
multistakeholder action. International cooperation among governments is vital. However, 
it needs to be combined with inclusive initiatives that bring in the perspectives, ideas, and 
resources of civil society and private sector organizations to collaborate on solutions.
One of the most significant transformations since the UN was established has been the 
advent of the internet and the use of digital technologies. Multistakeholder models for digital 
cooperation are now largely accepted as important for informed policymaking in many 
intergovernmental organizations and by at least some national governments. Microsoft 
welcomes the Secretary-General’s embrace of multistakeholderism and digital cooperation. 
It is also important to face up to the challenges and opportunities presented by digital 
transformation in a multidisciplinary and cross-cutting way, which means ensuring a breadth 
and diversity of expertise and experience are brought to bear. This is not just about involving 
stakeholders from outside government; it is also about working sensibly across governments, 
as well as between UN agencies and international organizations, to avoid working in silos. 
For example, this means involving both those responsible for sectors that can benefit from 
digital transformation and those involved in ensuring the underlying connectivity needs of 
this digital transformation. 
Bringing a full range of voices to the table will enable more holistic policymaking, which is 
better equipped to strike the right policy balances. The OECD provided a good example 
of this with its Going Digital integrated policy framework  designed to help policymakers 
develop a strategy for making digital transformation work for growth and wellbeing. 
Finally, as the Secretary-General said in outlining his priorities for 2022 , global problems 
are, at heart, failures of global governance. We should take this opportunity to set out the 
need for good governance principles, including transparency and inclusiveness, as these are 
essential for building and retaining trust. Importantly, these are principles that should be 
embodied not just by governments and the UN system but also by businesses.
  19
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact ConsultationKey commitments to bring about these core principles
Convened by the UN, the Internet Governance Forum is a truly global and bottom-up forum 
for multistakeholder discussion about the challenges and opportunities stemming from 
digital technologies. At the most basic level, there is value in how it brings people together 
from different backgrounds, perspectives, and parts of the world, allowing new connections 
and viewpoints to be formed. It then plays an important role in identifying and forming 
consensus views as inputs on how to manage the governance of digital technologies and 
the internet itself. 
We welcome the improvements being driven by the Secretary-General, including the recent 
appointment of an IGF Leadership Panel that can add value by transmitting the IGF’s outputs 
to relevant decision-making bodies and intergovernmental processes, and by bringing in 
more funding to ensure the IGF has the resources to deliver on its mandate. 
Microsoft itself commits to continuing to contribute to multistakeholder initiatives that 
offer the potential to maximize the opportunities from, and tackle the pitfalls of, digital 
transformation. Examples include: 
• Ongoing contributions to the IGF, including donations to the IGF Trust Fund, and our 
partnership with the IGF Secretariat to provide capacity-building. It also means generally 
playing a part in the work of the IGF, including through leadership roles Microsoft has 
held in intersessional workstreams on cybersecurity, AI, and the environment and by 
contributing to the work of the IGF’s Multistakeholder Advisory Group. 
• Microsoft co-chaired the Private Sector Forum at the 5th UN Conference on the Least 
Developed Countries (LDC5) in 2022-23, collaborating with the UN, governments, civil 
society, and companies across sectors to harness entrepreneurship and advance the 
goals and aspirations of people living in LDCs.
• Microsoft is actively engaged in multistakeholder organizations and processes aimed at 
addressing online harms. For example, Microsoft has led an effort through the World 
Economic Forum’s Global Coalition for Digital Safety to develop Global Principles on 
Digital Safety: Translating International Human Rights for the Digital Context . Microsoft 
has also been actively involved in the Christchurch Call to Action  to eliminate terrorist 
and violent extremist content online, and the WeProtect Global Alliance . 
20
 
Microsoft’s Input to the Global Digital Compact Consultation20
