 
     
 
UN-HABITAT’S CONTRIBUTION TO THE GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
Background  
In September 2020, the Secretary -General released Our Common Agenda . This report proposes a Global 
Digital Compact  to improve digital cooperation and “outline shared principles for an  open, free and secure 
digital future for all”. The Global Digital Compact builds on the recommendations from the Roadmap for 
Digital Cooperation  and will be the main outcome of a multi -stakeholder technology track  at the Summit of 
the Future (September 202 4). This process should include the United Nations, the private sector and civil 
society, grassroots organizations, academia and individuals globally.  
 
Ahead of the negotiations on the Compact (expected during the 77th session of the General Assembly 
2022/2023) and the Summit, the UN Secretariat launched an inclusive preparatory process including an 
online space  to shape the Global Digital Compact and contribute with ideas, opinions and views in the 
following areas:  
1. Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  
2. Avoid internet fragmentation  
3. Protect data  
4. Apply human rights online  
5. Accountability for discrimination and mislea ding content  
6. Regulation of artificial intelligence  
7. Digital commons as a global public good  
8. Other areas  
 
More details on the process can be found in the Global Digital Compact Background Note  and the Guidance 
Report . 
 
UN-Habitat responses to the survey  
 
Area  Core Principles  Key Commitment  / Pledges  / Actions  
1. Connect all 
people to the 
internet, 
including all 
schools  • Bridge the digital divide in 
terms of connectivity, 
skills and literacies of 
vulnerable groups  
• Internet accessibility and 
affordability  • Ensure equal access to the internet and 
meaningful connectivity by increasing 
digital li teracy   
• Promote partnerships and collaborations 
to ensure accessibility and affordability of 
internet (including last mile connectivity) 
to access and use digital solutions  
• Increase capacity in assessing and 
addressing digital divide in terms of 
gender, ag e, race and educational level 
and capacity in the Digital Equity pillar of 
UN-Habitat’s people -centered approach  
• Bridge the digital divide especially for 
marginalised groups and informal 
settlement communities  
• Empower and upskill (local) governments 
to lead in bridging the digital divide for all 
urban residents  
 
     
2. Avoid 
internet 
fragmentation  • Safeguard fundamental 
interoperability  
• Adequate internet 
policies  
• Open -source platforms  • Promote systems at all governance levels 
(local, regional, national, global) that are 
fully interoperable  
• Support (local) governments in setting up 
adequate internet policies and design 
open -source platforms with open -source 
data, accessible by all  
3. Protect 
data  • Personal rights, 
protection of self and 
personal relation in 
private and public sphere 
(no profiling)  
• Ensure shared data 
ownership and 
protection    Following the People -Centered Smart Cities 
Flagship  principles:  
• Build more efficient and secure data 
management systems and protect 
citizens’ privacy when using d igital 
services.   
• Promote regulations and laws to ensure 
that people are able to control what 
happens to the data generated by and 
about themselves, who gets to see and 
use it, and for what purposes.  
• Promote data governance frameworks 
and set standards and  responsibilities for 
better accountability and inclusivity and 
risk mitigation from data collection and 
data sovereignty from people and 
communities  
• Promote and implement cybersecurity 
tools at both national and local 
government levels to secure data 
exch ange and ensure that citizen data is 
protected.   
4. Apply 
human rights 
online  • Ground digital 
infrastructure and 
services in human rights 
and ensure the protection 
and promotion of human 
rights in digital spaces   • Increase capacities to develop, procure 
and effectively use digital technologies in 
an ethical, inclusive and sustainable way 
to make sure that no one is left behind  
• Support the design of standards and 
guidelines to include human rights 
principles such as privacy, equal access 
freedom of expression and representation 
into digital platforms, infrastructure and 
services  
• Create open and participatory 
opportunities to shape the development 
and use of technologies  
• Promote international cooperation in data 
protection, privacy, digital  identity, 
surveillance technologies, online violence 
and harassment  
• Promote the Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human rights  – Protect, 
Respect, Remedy’ Framework   
 
     
5. 
Accountability 
for 
discrimination 
& misleading 
content  N/A N/A 
6. Regulation 
of artificial 
intelligence  Transparency, accountability, and 
non-discrimination of data, 
content and algorithms.  Following the  Cities Coalition for Digital Rights  
(CC4DR) principles:  
• Ensure access to understandable and 
accurate information about the 
technological, algorithmic and artificial 
intelli gence systems that impact people’s 
lives, and the ability to question and 
change unfair, biased or discriminatory 
systems.  
7. Digital 
commons as 
a global 
public good  Provide digital public goods that 
are open, accessible and 
interoperable  Following the New Urban Agenda  (§92, §156, 
§160) : 
• Increase public oversight, accessibility 
and interoperability of data and 
infrastructure  
• Ensure robust human rights and 
governance frameworks to enhance trust 
in technology and data use while ensuring 
inclusion and mitigating potential risks  
• Endorse the principles of the Digital Public 
Goods Alliance  
• Promote the adoption of open standards, 
procurement guidelines  
• Prevent vendor lock -in practices   
8. OTHER  (1): 
Smart cities 
governance  • Sustainability and 
accessibility of tools and 
technologies  
• Promote digital 
governance frameworks 
in smart cities to ensure 
the development of 
technical solutions have 
impactful positive 
outcomes to people and 
that they address needs   Following the People -Centered Sma rt Cities 
Flagship Programme  and the New Urban Agenda : 
• Support national and local governments 
with their digital transition, applying a 
multi -level governance strategy to help 
build skills and capabilities to develop, 
procure and effectively use digital 
technologies in an ethical and inclusive 
way to make sure that no one is left 
behind.  
• Ensure that deploymen t of technology and 
innovation is used to ensure 
sustainability, inclusivity, prosperity and 
human rights in cities  
• Evaluate the need for technology to 
address public issues and narrow equity, 
environmental and  social inequalities in 
smart city activities   
 
     
8. OTHER (2): 
Local  
leadership on 
digital 
cooperation  • Strengthen the role of 
mayors and local 
governments in driving 
the digital cooperation 
agenda  Following the collaboration between UN -Habitat 
and the SG’s Office of the Envoy on Technology:  
• Set up a Global Alliance of Mayors for 
Digital Cooperation  
• Support the development of guidelines 
and a playbook on local action for 
strengthened digital cooperation  
• Promote digital cooperation principles at 
the local level globally, and strengthen the 
role of mayor s as digital leaders  
• Translate the Global Digital Compact to 
action at the city level  
 
Contributors  
 
# Full Name  Email  
1. Abdinassir Shale Sagar  Abdinassir.sagar@un.org  
2. Pontus Westerberg  Pontus.westerberg@un.org   
3. Isabel Wetzel  Isabel.wetzel@un.org   
4. Hazel Kuria  Hazel.kuria@un.org   
5. Florencia Serale  Florencia.serale@un.org   
 