1 
 China IGF Input to the Global Digital Compact  
 
To respond to the call of contributing to the Summit of the Future and the Global Digital 
Compact  (GDC) , the China IGF delivered an open proposal to invite the Chinese 
Internet community to join the GDC -related consultation process and contribute input 
from different expertise. The community  activ ely joined the process and shared their 
knowledge  and insight s to input as follow s. 
 
⚫ Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  
 
Core Principle 1:  
The innovation and development of digital infrastructure should be promoted equitably 
and fairly for all.  
Key Commitments ： 
Within international and regional cooperation mechanisms, multilateral and multi -
stakeholder cooperation on digital infrastructure should be promoted through initiatives 
on digital cooperation as well as other means. Supports to the developing countries on  
Internet infrastructure construction should be encouraged. The deployment of IPv6 
should be accelerated to connect more people and devices to the Internet.  
 
Core Principle 2:  
Language should not be a disincentive for people to connect to the Internet.  
Key Commitments ： 
Internationalized Domain Names, as easy access to the Internet in native languages for 
people around the world, should be further deployed and implemented for Universal 
Acceptance.  
 
Core Principle 3:  
The development of digital technology should be inclusive, while barriers to the 
2 
 application should be removed. Digital education should be strengthened.  
Key Commitments:  
Investment in digital education should be encouraged and supported, with domestic 
policies developed to enhance education and training at all levels of digital literacy.  
Attention should be paid to the equal rights of women, children, persons with 
disabilities, refugees  and persons with specific needs to digital technology, and joint 
efforts should be made to solve their difficulties in digital technology application, so as 
to achieve digital inclusion.  
 
(Authors : Xiao Z HANG, Lang W ANG, Feng G UO, X iaomin Y ANG, Rui Z HONG, 
Jiali L I ) 
 
⚫ Avoid Internet fragmentation  
 
Core Principle 1:  
To prevent countries from imposing arbitrary restrictions on cross -border data flows  
and fragmenting  the digital governance , based on data security rules.  
Key Commitments:  
Rules should  be established to ensure legitimate and controllab le flow of data globally, 
while promoting free flow.  
It is essential to establish a framework rule for global regulatory compatibility of cross -
border data flows. Each legal order should  seek a "common law" for cross -border data 
flows, applying common sol utions or principles to the same legal problems. Countries' 
domestic legislation should  interact with the international rule of law, and the domestic 
data security regulatory system should  align with national security e xceptions to guide, 
encourage and pro mote cross -border data flow . Thi s is essen tial to suppress the 
prohibitions in domestic data security laws and eliminate the arbitrariness of applying 
national security exceptions that restrict cross -border data flow.  
 
3 
 Core Principle 2:  
Ensure the integrity and reliability of Internet infrastructure and core resources.  
Key Commitments:  
Protect Internet infrastructure, support its construction, maintain the neutrality of 
Internet core resources, and maintain the commonal ity of digital access technologies. A 
consensus -based system should  be built for research and knowledge sharing on network 
fragmentation. It is essential to enhance resilience and elasticity to respond to the 
impact of network fragmentation with a focus on  technical standards, industrial ecology, 
and global supply chains. Critical infrastructure supporting the global network should  
be protected effectively.  
 
Core Principle 3:  
Support a sustainable technology community.  
Key Commitments:  
it is essential to maintaining technical community development sustainability, 
enhancing trust among technical community members, improving knowledge sharing 
levels, and strengthening the ability of technical communities to deal with threats. It is 
necessary to promote the c onstruction of a technical community governance community.  
 
(Authors : Xingdong FANG, Wenxiang ZHANG, Yilin SUN, Yi SHEN , Xiangming 
ZHONG ) 
 
⚫ Protect Data  
 
Core principle 1: Guarantee data security  
Key commitments:  
The security of critical  information infrastructure  and application design should be 
ensured . Measures such as data  encryption  should be taken to guarantee data security . 
The adoption  of data classification system  should be considered, and a balance between 
4 
 data security and data  development should be struck.  Attention  should be paid  to the 
accuracy, high-quality and standardization of data . Data integration and interoperability  
should be improved . 
 
Core principle 2: Protect  personal data and privacy  
Key commitments:  
The legislation should  endow individuals with rights to their personal data, prevent ing 
and stopping  infringement  of personal data rights . Personal data processing should 
uphold the principles of lawfulness, legitimacy, necessity, and good faith. The 
colle ction of personal data should not be excessive and illegal，and should be limited 
to the minimum scope for the purpose of processing. The period for storing personal 
data sh ould not exceed the necessary period stipulated by law.  
 
Core Principle 3: Maintain data fairness and justice  
Key commitments:  
The principle of universality and inclusiveness of data  should be upheld, and data bias, 
marginalization,  and discrimination  should be avoided. Digital literacy education and 
digital capacity building are importan t countermeasures in bridging  data divide, 
knowledge  gap, etc. I ndividuals and organization s should be given  equal access to and 
can benefit equally from  data, information,  and knowledge with public interest 
attributes . 
 
Core Principle 4: Guarantee the responsibility and accountability  of relevant 
actors  
Key commitments:  
Data should  be develop ed and utiliz ed in accordance with laws, regulations,  and ethical 
principles . Accou ntability mechanism  should be  included in d ata protection laws and 
regulations and full implementation should be achieved.  
 
Core Principle 5: Adher e to multi -party  data governance  
5 
 Key commitments:  
All parties should work together to enhance  the u tilization , development,  and security 
of data. Institutional and law enforcement capabilities  should be strengthen ed. The 
improvement of data protection  abilities is indispensable for the public , and the 
supervision of data protection is also a necessity . 
 
Core Principle 6: Enhanc e international cooperation and mutual trust in  data  
Key commitments:  
International cooperation in  data security governance , data development and utilization 
should  be s trengthen ed, promot ing the orderly  and free cross -border data flow  
according to laws . Mutual trust in  data security and ICT utilization should be enhanced. 
The formulation of global rules  should be promoted under the framework of the United 
Nations, and t he global rules of cross -border data flow  should  leave adequate  polic y 
space.  
 
(Authors : Yongjiang X IE, Xuefeng Z HOU , Yik Chan C HIN, Xingdong F ANG , Yunfei 
ZHOU , Xiaonan L I, Na L I, Lei W ANG , and Xiaobo Y ANG as rapporteur ) 
 
⚫ Apply human rights online  
 
Core Principle 1:  
Ensure the connectivity, resilience, and security of the Internet's critical infrastructure 
and resources.  
Key commitments:  
Recognize the Internet's critical infrastructure and key resources as the public core in 
international law or international code of conduct.  
 
Core Principle 2:  
Establish an environment for inclusive and equal participation in the development of 
6 
 Internet technical standards, regulatory mechanisms and frameworks.  
Key commitments:  
Establish inclusive and equitable environments, participatory mechanisms, and 
capacity -building pro grams such as skills and knowledge trainings and funding to 
encourage and support various  vulnerable groups such as women, the elderly, people 
with disabilities, to effectively and equally participate in Internet governance.  
 
Core Principle 3: Emphasize th e indivisibility of all human rights, systematically and 
comprehensively promote economic, political, social, cultural, environmental  rights i n 
digital sphere . 
Key commitments:  
Uphold the international legal system and the spirit of international law with the UN 
Charter at its core, reaffirm the indivisibility and balance in the human rights legal 
system, and the balance with other legal regimes, and establish a sound legal support 
system to ensure that all people can enjoy the accessibility, security and b enefits of the 
Internet.  
 
Core Principle 4:  
Build a more interactive and inclusive participatory governance system, improving 
international cooperation and strategic engagement with other players and forums of 
governance systems at global and regional levels. 
Key commitments:  
Encourage multi -stakeholder s to actively promote the construction and improvement 
of a participatory governance system ; establish an inclusive and open governance 
system , participation mechanism and capacity building plans ; establish an expert pool 
of governance participants, and encourage global and regional international cooperation 
and strategic engagement of stakeholders.  
 
Core Principle 5:  
Digital Inclusion  
7 
 Key commitments:  
Develop a technology transfer plan from developed to less developed 
countries/communities.  
 
(Authors : Yi SHEN,  Yik Chan CHIN, Peixi XU, Yilin SUN)  
 
⚫ Introduce accountability criteria for discrimination and 
misleading content  
 
Core Principle 1:  
Any propaganda for war and any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that 
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited by law.  
 
Key Commitments:  
States should be prohibited from  using information and communications technologies 
and information and communications networks to interfere in the internal affairs of 
other States or with the aim of undermining their political, economic and social stability. 
States should cooperate in combating  criminal and terrorist activities that use 
information and communications technologies and information and communications 
networks, and in curbing the dissemination of information that incites terrorism, 
separatism or extremism or that inflames hatred on ethnic, racial or religious grounds. 
Private sector should incorporate the key principles against war propaganda and 
national, racial or religious hatred into its terms of use or community rules and have 
them implemented in content moderation. Civil societ y organizations, technical 
community, and academia as well should work together to ensure that the notification, 
criteria, and remedy mechanism regarding discrimination and misleading content work 
properly and impartially.  
 
Core Principle 2:  
8 
 Maintain a pr inciple of inclusion and responsibility.  
 
Key Commitments:  
Social media platforms should embrace diversities and be independent of politics, races, 
ethnic groups, religions, and gender as well. Social media platforms should establish 
mechanisms, criteria,  and procedures of dispute resolution regarding discrimination and 
misleading content. Professional and traditional media also play a key role in 
eliminating discrimination and misleading content by following certain news norms.  
Core Principle 3:  
Follow a  principle of enhancing digital literacy education.  
 
Key Commitments:  
Efforts should be taken to enhance digital literacy education to ensure that citizens have 
a critical attitude towards the information or content they encounter, to help recognize 
discr imination and misleading content, and improve the degree of democratic 
participation. Digital literacy education can help vulnerable individuals and groups to 
improve their awareness of online risks. Different measures can be directed to different 
populati on groups such as the youth and the old for their specific needs and risks. 
Digital literacy courses should include those that can help children improve their digital 
skills and avoid harms of discrimination and misleading content. Meanwhile, necessary 
training resources should be prepared to improve the digital literacy of parents, other 
supervisors or teachers.  
 
(Authors : Peixi XU, Yongjiang Xie, Xuefeng ZHOU, Yi SHEN)  
 
⚫ Promote regulation of artificial intelligence  
 
Core Principle 1: Inclusiveness  
The principle of inclusiveness contains five dimensions: social well -being, fairness and 
9 
 justice, diversity, balance, and sustainability.  
 
Core Principle 2: Safety and Security  
The principle of safety and security contains four dimensions: re liability, controllability, 
traceability, and accountability.  
 
Core Principle 3: Cooperation  
The principle of cooperation contains three dimensions: openness, credibility, and 
equality.  
 
Core Principle 4: Agility  
The principle of agility contains three dimensions: dialogue, mutual -reference, and 
interoperability.  
 
Key Commitments:  
The following action plan s are proposed  to implement the principles of AI development 
and governance effectively.  
1. Establishing an International Cooperation Platform for A I Development and 
Governance  
Establish and maintain an international cooperation platform for AI development and 
governance under the United Nations system to strengthen international cooperation. 
The platform could be similar to Internet Governance Forum,  and aims at promoting 
value consensus, standard formulation, rule negotiation, and experience sharing, etc.  
2. Constructing an Evaluation System for AI Development and Governance  
Stick to the philosophy of "ethics pioneering the way forward", all nations sho uld 
actively explore and establish AI ethical impact assessment frameworks to develop the 
practical guides of AI ethics, formulate the audit and administrative rules on 
engineering ethics, innovate the designation of rules and tools, and enhance the 
capaci ties building of AI security evaluation and control. Encourage the transnational 
sharing of best practices, and conduct international dialogues and form international 
10 
 consensus.  
3. Initiating an Education Program for AI Ethics and Digital Literacy   
Launch th e "AI Education Popularization Program" to reduce digital inequality caused 
by the widespread adoption of AI, and enhance the capacity of disadvantaged, 
vulnerable groups, and minority groups to apply AI. Launch the "AI Ethics Education 
and Training Progra m" to improve the ethical level of practitioners and promote the 
development and application of AI in a responsible and ethical manner.  
 
(Authors : Yilin  SUN , Yan LI, Xuefeng  ZHOU, Jing ZHAO, Yi SHEN, Ying CHEN, 
Xiaonan LI, Kai JIA)  
 
 
Note：Where any discrepancy arises between the English translation and 
the Original Chinese version  (Appendix 2) , the Chinese version shall 
prevail.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 Appendix 1:  
Coordinators:  
➢ Chengqing  HUANG, Vice President, Chair of China IGF, Vice President of the 
Internet Society of China (ISC)  
➢ Xiao Z HANG: Executive Vice Chair of China IGF, Deputy Director General of the 
China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC)  
➢ Rui Z HONG: Secretary General o f China IGF, Director of International Affairs 
Department , ISC  
Authors :  
➢ Xiao Z HANG: Executive Vice Chair of China IGF, Deputy Director General of 
CNNIC  
➢ Lang W ANG: Vice Chair of ICANN GAC, Head of International Affairs 
Department of CNNIC   
➢ Feng G UO: Deputy  Secretary General of China IGF, Policy Researcher of the 
China Academy of Information and Communications Technology ( CAICT ) 
➢ Xiaomin Y ANG:  Policy Researcher of the CAICT   
➢ Rui Z HONG: Secretary General of China IGF, Director of International Affairs 
Departme nt, ISC  
➢ Jiali L I: Project Manager, International Affairs Department  of ISC   
➢ Xingdong FANG : Qiushi Distinguished Professor, Zhejing  University; Director, 
Wuzhen Institute for Digital Civilization  
➢ Wenxiang Z HANG : Professor, School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang 
University  
➢ Xiangming Z HONG: Secretary General , Consortium of Internet and Society , 
Communication University of Zhe jiang  
➢ Yilin  SUN:  Deputy Secretary General, Senior Engineer, Institute of International 
and Strategic Studies, Peking University  
➢ Yi SHEN: Professor, School of International Politics and Public Affairs, Fudan 
University  
12 
 ➢ Yik Chan CHIN: Associate Professor,  School of Journalism and Communication, 
Beijing Normal University  
➢ Peixi  XU, Professor, the Communication University of China  
➢ Yongjiang XIE, Professor, School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing University of 
Posts and Telecomm unications  
➢ Xuefeng ZHOU, Vice Dean & Professor, Law School of Beihang University  
➢ Yunfei ZHOU, Intern, Division for Public Institutions and Digital Government, 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs  
➢ Xiaonan LI, Assistant Professor, Law Sch ool, Zhengzhou University  
➢ Na LI, Policy Researcher, Internet Governance Research Center, Fuxi Institution  
➢ Lei W ANG , Researcher, Lab for AI & Law, Beijing Institute of Technology  
➢ Xiaobo YANG, Director of Internet Governance Research Center, Fuxi Institution  
➢ Yan LI, Director of Institute of Sci -tech and Cybersecurity, China Institute of 
Contemporary International Relations  
➢ Jing ZHAO, Associate Professor,School of Public Policy and Management , 
Tsinghua University  
➢ Ying  CHEN, PhD Candidate,School of Public Polic y and Management , Tsinghua 
University  
➢ Kai JIA, Associate Professor, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 Appendix 2:  
 
中国 IGF关于 “全球数字契约 ”的建言  
 
一、关于数字连接  
（Connect all people to the internet, including all schools ） 
核心原则 1：公平促进数字基础设施建设与创新发展。  
关键承诺：  
在全球和地区组织及合作机制内，通过发布数字合作倡
议等方式，推动多边与多方加强数字基础设施合作 ；鼓励向
发展中国家提供 数字基础设施 建设支持；支持 IPv6加快部
署，以连接更多的人和设备上网。  
 
核心原则 2：语言不应成为人们连接互联网的阻碍因素。  
关键承诺：  
国际化域名应当进一步部署和实施，促进普遍接受，以
方便全球各地的人使用母语上网。  
 
核心原则 3：支持数字技术包容发展，消除数字应用壁垒，
强化数字教育。  
关键承诺：  
鼓励支持对数字教育的投入，在本国推动制定相关政 策
14 
 加强数字素养和技能 面的教育与培训。重视妇女、老人、儿
童、残疾人 、难民和有具体需求人士享受数字技术平等权利
问题，共同推动解决其在运用数字技术方面遇到的困难，实
现数字包容发展。  
 
二、关于 避免互联网碎片化  
（Avoid internet fragmentation ） 
核心原则 1：防止各国基于数据安全规则对数据跨境流动限
制的随意性和数字治理的碎片化。  
关键承诺 ： 
构建数据跨境流动正当可控规则，促进全球数据自由流
动的同时，保证数据大规模流动和利用过程的正当性和可控
性。  
建立数据跨境流动全球规制兼容性框架规则，各法律秩
序寻求数据跨境流动的 “共同法 ”，相同的法律问题能适用共
同的解决方案或共同原则。 各国国内立法与国际法治互动，
国内数据安全规范体系与国家安全例外条款对接，引导、鼓
励和促进数据跨境流动，从而达到压制国内数据安全法中的
禁止性规定，以实现破除国家安全例外条款 在限制数据跨境
流动中适用的随意性之效果。  
 
核心原则 2：确保互联网基础设施和核心资源的完整性和可
15 
 靠性。 
关键承诺 ： 
保护互联网基础设施 ；支持互联网基础设施的建设 ；保
持互联网核心资源的中立性 ；保持数字接入技术的通用性 ；
构建基于共识的网络碎片化研究与知识共享体系 ；以技术标
准，产业生态和全球供应链为侧重点，提升应对网络碎片化
冲击的韧性与弹性 ；有效保护支撑全球网络的关键基础设施 。 
 
核心原则 3：支持可持续发展的技术社区 。 
关键承诺：  
保持技术社区发展的可持续性；维护与增进技术社区成
员间的信任；提升技术社区的知识共享水平和应对威胁的能
力；推进技术社区治理共同体的构建。  
 
三、关于数据保护  
（Protect data ） 
核心原则 1：确保数据安全。  
关键承诺：  
保护关键信息基础设施安全。确保应用设计安全性，采
取加密等措施保障数据安全。采取分类分级的数据保护思路，
兼顾安全与发展平衡。重视数据的准确性、高质量性和标准
化，促进数据整合互通和互操作。  
16 
  
核心原则 2：保护个人数据和隐私。  
关键承诺：  
通过立法赋予个人对其个人数据的各项权利，防范、制
止侵害个人数据权利的行为。个人数据处理应遵循合法、正
当、必要和诚信原则，不得过度收集和非法获取个人数据，
个人数据收集应限于实现处理目的的最小范围，存储不应超
过法定期限。  
 
核心原则 3：维护数据公平和正义。  
关键承诺：  
坚持数据普惠性和包容性，防止数据偏见、边缘化和歧
视，提升数字素养和能力以解决数 据和知识鸿沟等问题。保
障个人和机构平等获取具有公共利益属性数据、信息和知识
并从中受益的权利。  
 
核心原则 4：确保有关主体责任和问责制 。 
关键承诺：  
数据开发利用应符合法 律法规和伦理规范。数据保护法
需包含问责机制并确保得到落实。  
 
核心原则 5：坚持多方参与数据治理。  
17 
 关键承诺：  
发挥多方主体作用共促数据利用、发展和安全。加强制
度能力和执法能力建设，提高公众数据保护能力，加强对数
据保护的监督。  
 
核心原则 6：增进数据领域国际合作与互信。  
关键承诺：  
加强数据安全治理和开发利用领域的国际合作，促进数
据跨境依法有序自由流动。增进在保障数据安全和使用信息
技术领域的互信。在联合国框架下推动数据领域国际规则制
定，数据跨境流动规则应留有足够的政策空间。  
 
四、关于网络人权  
（Apply human rights online ） 
核心原则 1：确保互联网的关键基础设施和资源的连通性、
韧性和安全。  
关键承诺：  
将互联网的关键基础设施和关键资源作为国际法或国
际行为守则的公共核心。  
 
核心原则 2：确立包容、平等参与制定互联网技术标准、监
管机制和框架 的环境。 
18 
 关键承诺：  
建立包容性和平等的 环境、参与机制以及能力建设计划，
例如开展技能和知识培训并提供资金，以鼓励和支持妇女、
残疾人、老年人等各类弱势人群能够有效地平等参与互联网
治理。  
 
核心原则 3：强调人权的不可分割性， 系统和全面的在 数字
领域增进经济、政治、社会、文化、环境权利。  
关键承诺：  
遵循联合国宪章为核心的国际法体系和国际法精神，关
注人权法体系内的 不可分割性 与平衡，以及与 其他法律 部门
之间的平衡， 建立为确保所有人能享有互联网的可及、安全
和益处构建良性的法律支撑体系 。 
 
核心原则 4：建立一个更具交互和包容性的参与性治理体系，
改善全球和区域范围内治理体系 的参与者和论坛的国际合
作和战略参与。  
关键承诺：  
鼓励多利益相关方积极推进参与 性治理体系的建设与
完善，建立包容性和 开放性的治理体系 参与机制以及能力建
设计划，建立治理参与者 专家库，鼓励 全球和区域范围内治
理参与者 的国际合作和战略参与 。 
19 
  
核心原则 5：数字包容 。 
关键承诺：  
制定从发达到次发达国家 /社群的技术转移计划。  
 
五、关于 引入对歧视和误导信息问责标准  
（Introduce accountability criteria for discrimination and misleading 
content） 
核心原则 1：任何鼓吹战争的宣传，任何鼓吹民族、种族或
宗教仇恨的主张，构成煽动歧视、敌视或暴力者，应以法律
加以禁止。  
关键承诺：  
国家行为主体应该被禁止利用信息通信技术和信息通
信网络干涉他国内政，破坏他国政治、经济和社会稳定。国
家行为主体应该合作打击利用信息通信技术和信息通信网
络从事犯罪和恐怖活动，或传播宣扬恐怖主义、分裂主义 、
极端主义以及煽动民族、种族和宗教敌意的行为。私营部门
应该将关于反对战争宣传和民族、种族或宗教仇恨的原则纳
入用户条款或社区规则，并在内容审核中进行贯彻。民间团
体、技术社群以及学者应该共同努力，确保关于歧视和误导
性内容的告知、标准以及救济机制公平合理运转。  
 
20 
 核心原则 2：坚持包容与责任原则。  
关键承诺：  
社交媒介平台应独立于政治、 种族、 民族、 宗教和性别，
包容多元化社群。社交媒介平台应建立解决个人和社会所面
临风险的机制、标准和程序，来应对歧视和误导性内容。专
业新闻和媒体在消除歧视和误导性信息方面发挥着重要作
用，包括对既定新闻规范的承诺。  
 
核心原则 3：坚持加强数字素养教育原则。  
关键承诺：  
应加强数字素养技能教育，使公民能够对所遇到的内容
或信息持更具批判性的意识，这有助于识别歧视和误导性内
容，提高民主参与度。数字素养教育有助于提高在线安全意
识，尤其是对弱势的个人和社群。针对不同人口群体的需求
和风险所采取的各项举措需要保持敏感度。例如，针对 青少
年和老年人采取的不同方法，可对应不同的使用模式。数字
素养教育课程应包 含帮助儿童安全上网的数字素养技能，预
防其受到虚假信息和误导性信息的伤害；并应为提升 父母、
其他监护人和教师 的数字素养提供必要培训资源。  
 
六、关于人工智能规制  
（Promote regulation of artificial intelligence ） 
21 
 核心原则 1：包容性原则 ，涵盖促进福祉、公平公正、多样
性、平衡性、可持续五个内涵。  
核心原则 2：安全性原则 ，涵盖可靠性、可控性、可追溯性、
可问责四个内涵。  
核心原则 3：合作性原则 ，涵盖开放、可信、平等三个内涵。  
核心原则 4：敏捷性原则 ，涵盖可对话、可借鉴、可互操作
三个内涵。  
 
关键承诺：  
⚫ 开展人工智能发展与治理国际性合作平台建设  
以 “全球数字契约” 建设进程为起点， 在联合国 框架下，
类似于“联合国互联网治理论坛（ IGF）”，成立专门讨论人
工智能发展与治理的国际性会议平台，在 理念共识、标准制
定、规则协商、经验互鉴等方面推进国际合作。  
⚫ 开展人工智能发展与治理评估体系建设  
各国应积极探索并建立人工智能伦理影响评估框架与
落实机制，在透明度协议、影响测试、外部审计、全生命周
期流程监督等方面创新制度与工具设计。推动最佳实践的跨
国分享与同行评议，开展国际对话并形成国际共识。  
⚫ 开展人工智能伦理教育与数字素养提升计划   
启动“人工智能教育普及计划”，减少因广泛采用人工
智能而造成的数字不平等现象， 并提升弱势群体、 脆弱群体、
22 
 少数群体的人工智能应用能力。启动“人工智能伦理教育培
训计划”，提升从业人员伦理水平，推动以负责任和合乎伦
理方式发展与应用人工智能。  
 
 
 
 
 
 