UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
 
Digital Literacy: The Great Divide  
 
Table of Contents  
Into  1 
Summary of the discussion  2 
Issue 1: Improvement of Digital  literacy  to  prevent  further class divisions of societies within Europe and globally. 
Ensuring regional cohesion and stronger economic growth via digitalisation.  /target:  Ensuring  digital inclusion for all, 
including the most vulnerable/  2 
Summary of Issue1 recommendations:  3 
Issue 2: Digital Literacy and AI - the Dawning of a New Age of Digital Societies /target:  Supporting global cooperati on on 
Artificial Intelligence/  3 
Summary of Issue2 recommendations  4 
Issue 3: Tackling democratization  of digital innovations as a public good. /target:  Building a more effective architecture for 
digital cooperation/  4 
Summary of Issue3 recommendations  5 
Draft Brief Summary of Consultation Recommendation  6 
Co-authors of the recommendations  7 
 
 
Intro  
 
Digital literacy is a regionally defined  and culturally amplified topic, which concerns all nations and regions 
across the globe  to a varying degree.  While the speed of digitalization in the last couple of decades has 
improved the living standards and conditions in a variety of geographies acro ss the globe, groups of people 
are left outside of the current wave of innovations. To mitigate this disparity, global entities, such as the UN 
could take a proactive stance to ensure that individuals with little or no digital literacy are up to par with t he 
New Age of AI preventing further gaps in economic and lifestyle advancement.  
 
On 09.03.2023, Dr. Monika Manolova ( Digital National Alliance Bulgaria ) hosted a meeting in collaboration 
with Dr. Haydee Sh eombar ( Kankan*Tree ) and Jaisal Surana( MKAI.org ) to implem ent a consultation on the 
topic of “Digital Literacy: the Great Divide” with organizations and experts from North America, South 
America, Asia, Africa and Europe   
Each of these organizations was invited to determine the key pain points and potential solutions which could 
be implemented at a more global scale. The focus is on addressing three core issues concerning the UN Digital 
Cooperation Roadmap.  
 
On 28.03.2023 A second meeting was hosted to cover the aspects, which were not included in the previous 
meeting, to allow for confirmation of inputs and for fu rther suggestions - including calls for action to the 
UN. 
 
The outcome of these two meetings supports the UN's aim for an inclusive and participatory process, managing 
to attract experts from a variety of countries, to voice a variety of issues in the digi tal realm . 

UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
  
 
 
The consultation  was attended by experts from 27 countries:  
Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Ecuador, Eritrea, Germany, Hungary,  India, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Mexico, 
Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, Portugal,  Pakistan,  Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, 
Türkiye, UAE, UK, USA  
 
Consultation Brief for the Public Side of the UN Digital Compact  
 
DNA Bulgaria, Kankan*Tree and MKAI hosted a public consultation for the UN Digital Compact on the topic 
“Digital Literacy: The Great Divide”, which was attended by  over 40 experts from 24 countries . 
  
Conclusions of the consultation  
  
While the world is connecting through digitalization, the disconnected remain a majority. This inequity 
disempowers people, especially educators and students, and  creates social divisions.  
Regional differences are a significant factor in the analysis of digital literacy but geography is secondary as 
literacy is an issue even within large metropolitan areas.  Access to basic services based on digitalization (such 
as transport, telecommunications, energy, and healthcare) is faced with barriers in the evolving digital context, 
affecting vulnerable groups and the elderly.   
  
Recommendations  
  
Education and lite racy  
  
● Effective awareness campaigns for digital literacy (via mediators) should be done in remote areas in 
Africa, but also for rural areas in Eastern Europe (e.g. Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, N. Macedonia), 
where people are unaware of opportunities created  through the use of technology. Awareness about 
digital literacy is also needed in main cities of several African countries, mainly sub -saharan countries.  
● Methodologies encouraging augmented education, higher order thinking skills and multimodal 
learning  should be developed for all social groups and regional extremes (e.g. Italy, most African 
countries), to deal with the high speed of digital evolutions (e.g. ChatGTP).  
● A “cultural invite” approach is needed, because while certain parts of the world integra te AI literacy 
to preserve jobs and upskill (e.g. Mexico), others perceive access to digital goods and services as an 
ethics issue.  
● Investments in user -friendly hardware are needed to prevent significant accessibility barriers (for 
children with disadvanta ges in e.g. UK, the elderly in e.g. Portugal and Belgium, children with 
disabilities e.g. Morocco).   
Economy  
● Digital education needs to include "informed consent" and "dynamic consent" for data use (e.g. 
healthcare). Even for executives these may be conce pts that require training(e.g. USA).  
● In the various stages of innovation additional investment is needed to support upskilling SMEs which 
provide jobs. (e.g. Philippines, Myanmar)  
● Trusted innovation networks should be established to demonstrate the advanta ges of digitalization to 
various segments of end -users (e.g. digital hubs approach in the EU)  
  
Digitalization  
● Digital literacy, skills, and divide must be clearly defined to support learning within growing evolving 
digital tools, (e.g. AI).  
● Transparency, trust, representation, safety , and security should be integrated in convergence tech and 
digital strategies.  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 ● Regulatory and strategic frameworks in AI/XR should be developed and/or improved through global 
expert oversight and collaboration to establish a b aseline standard for all stakeholders to comply with.  
● Collaboration must  be established between education and economic segments to implement innovative 
digital standards (through global communities and initiatives).  
● Expansive digitalization must include environmental mitigation in alignment with CODES UN and 
should support educating the end users about the impacts of digitalization.  
Link to the consultation report  
 
Summary of the meetings/discussions  
 
The “Digital Literacy: the Great Divide” discussion was focused on a variety of issues from unequal access to 
internet services across the globe, unequal levels of education access and divergent understanding of the 
terminology of digital literacy with some regions in the world, age and demographic  groups facing computer 
knowledge gaps, others facing digital literacy gaps and others needing to come to terms with the inclusion of 
the term “AI Literacy '' in the compendium of terms within their digital literacy frameworks. (Dr. Mulugetha 
T. Solomon, Omdena Milan  - suggested a clear delineation between the terminologies to focus areas of 
expertise on solving the variety of problems – digital literacy, computer literacy and artificial intelligence ( AI)  
literacy)  
 
Issue 1: Improvement of Digital  literacy  to prevent  further class divisions of societies within Europe and 
globally. Ensuring regional cohesion and stronger economic growth via  digitalization . /Target : Ensuring 
digital inclusion for all, including the most vulnerable/  
Background:  Africa leads the world in the percentage of the population without internet connection at 88 
percent. Furthermore, in the countries that are connected, male internet users outnumber their female 
counterparts in every region of the world.  
The ‘digital divid e’ we face globally does not just signify those who have access to the internet and those who 
do not, the gap also encompasses several other discrepancies, including the quality of digital infrastructure in 
rural communities, the speed of connectivity in r emote areas, and the training and skills required to navigate 
such technology.  
(Source: UNICEF ) 
The average % of Digital Skills in Euro pe is 31% and this % does not account for AI skills  
Intro by Dr. Haydee Shoembar, Kankan*Tree “Digital literacy is about navigating the technology and using 
it well. Digital literacy is a lot more than access to the internet. If we don’t get this right, w e’ll leave a lot of 
people behind across the globe and the goal is “leave no one behind””  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/DISCUSSION  
 
USA Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive 2030  (Education 
and literacy ) provided insights into  >350 schools in New York and the lack of capacity for some of the 
children in high school age to access the internet – in one of the most highly developed cities in the world. 
Thus, outlining the existing divides even within developed countries which need  to be brought to the attention 
of policy  makers as a  “social justice issue”  to ensure equal career opportunities for children. Inequality exists 
both locally and in macro degrees.   
Belgium Laura Babío, POLIS Network, Brussels, Belgium (Education and litera cy) The massive wave of 
digitization  of transport has a huge impact – apps to access the transport services, to evaluate the service,  have 
quite a significant impact on social exclusion especially on the elderly. It is an issue of transport justice.  
Tryin g to keep the human factor as part of the system  was noted as highly valuable and important to keep 
things inclusive and intuitive. A variety of industries have already tackled digitalization successfully (banking), 
but transport is still in between . 
Portugal  Mónica Rogério, ACDIPE, Portugal (Education and literacy)  In rural areas in Portugal landline  
phones are still used due to lack of internet . Their recent project experiences show that elderly people are 
excited and want to be included in the digit al world, but they face a variety of issues, from lack of internet in 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 rural areas to purely physical issues in interaction with touchscreen phones. An issue of age barriers 
throughout Europe was raised.  
UK Richard Foster -Fletcher, MKAI, UK (Economy)  Noted that recent experiences in digital literacy seminars 
conducted across the globe with a variety of governmental bodies(Philippines, Bermuda, Myanmar) and 
targeting SMEs, and organizations in the startup sphere, which ought to produce innovative outputs(pate nts, 
jobs, economic viability in sustainability) also struggle with digital literacy in the frame of AI, which moves 
through these 3 stages – 1st stage “Awareness of these technologies and inspiration”(high level of interest), 
2nd stage “Use cases and desi gn thinking”(medium level of interest), 3rd stage “Prototyping”(low level of 
interest).  Digital literacy in SMEs should be a focus of more interest in the 3rd stage of innovation.  
Nigeria, Daniel Opanubi, Omdena  (Educatio n and literacy ) - There are people  so far removed from digital 
culture that they are unaware and uninterested in getting digital culture. Contribution needs to be made for 
people like that.  To get them aware of what  people are doing. Then there are people who lack access to the 
basic minim um. Some people do not even have access to a mobile phone. A sort of awareness needs to be 
made, because there are people unaware of the opportunities which digital skills bring.  
Nigeria, Oluwaseun Wey, Nigeria Inter -Bank Settlement System, Nigeria (Educat ion and literacy) agrees as 
in Nigeria - it also goes beyond driving awareness only. Deploying systems and infrastructures that promote 
digital literacy and inclusion is crucial. Also, affordability is another critical area to promote digital literacy 
and inclusion; if these people cannot afford to buy internet -enabled mobile phones and subscribe to internet 
services, there will be no inclusion no matter how much awareness is done. This links to the number 1 
Millennium  Development Goal Another key area of r ecommendation to bridge this digital literacy gap in 
Nigeria and across Africa is Early Literacy i.e. equipping schools with digital systems and internet services 
so that children in the most rural areas can be exposed early on to the concept of digitizati on. 
Bulgaria, Jasen Tanev, Digital National Alliance/CyberClub  (Education and literacy)  – Noted that his 
experience with recent projects with minorities in Samokov, Bulgaria have led him to believe that people need 
to travel around the country and there need to be moderators of “digital gateways” which need to transfer the 
knowledge to the com munities, which have the lowest interest in advancing their own digital lite racy. 
Hungary , Dr. Tuan Trinh, EIT Digital Hungary ( Education and literacy ) What can be measured, can be 
managed. We need tools and methods to measure and monitor the performance a nd the level of maturity in 
digital literacy and readiness, e.g. DESI - Digital Economy and Society Index. There are a number of efforts 
in Hungary to do that, and also to compare the local measurement to the DESI figures.  Hungary performs 
relatively well  in digital infrastructure but there is a huge gap in the digital skills of citizens and digital 
readiness of businesses. According to a research by the ICT Association of Hungary, the majority of Hungarian 
businesses are not exploiting the opportunities o ffered by digital technologies with only 34 percent of SMEs 
having at least a basic level of digital intensity, significantly below the EU average of 55 percent, which is 
confirmed by the DESI 2022 figures. In addition, 49 percent of the Hungarian populati on aged 16 to 74 have 
basic digital skills, compared to 54 percent on average in the EU. It should also be noted that, during the 
pandemic, 81 percent of Hungarian Internet users used online public services, 16 percentage points better than 
EU average. It is thus recommended that the business sector in Hungary to increase their effort in adopting 
digital technologies to increase business efficiency as well as to continue the good work done in the public 
sector. Further notable efforts implemented in Hungary  with the support from the European Commission is 
the creation of the European Digital Innovation Hubs network to support digital literacy, digital innovation 
awareness and to improve digital maturity for the business and public sectors alike, focusing on SMEs. In 
Hungary, currently 5 EDIHs are running covering key topics in digital innovation and digital technologies, as 
well as digital applications. Finally , we recommend the strengthening of regional efforts. For Hungary case, 
exchanging and sharing the b est practices between Visegrad 4 countries (Poland, Czechia, Slovakia, Hungary) 
as well as countries situated along the Danube river (Germany, Austria, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, Croatia, 
Serbia, Bulgaria, Moldova, Ukraine) are highly recommended.  
UK, Jaisal Surana, MKAI (Education and literacy ) Noted that higher public investment in hardware 
technologies for vulnerable children and children with disabilities will need to be increased to prevent further 
expansion of the gaps within the education system.  
Serbia,  Miloš Dimitrijević, University of Kragujevac, Serbia (Education and literacy)  - Many remote areas 
do not have access to the Internet, while only urban areas are covered by high -speed Internet. The level of 
digital skills in Serbia is lagging  the EU average. Digital literacy index in 2022 observed a decline. There is a  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 gender  gap  in  digital  skills. These results point to the conclusion that policymakers should support  elderly, 
rural population, women, disabled persons, as the most vulnerable gro ups. Empowering  these groups  and 
increasing their digital literacy, which is  a  prerequisite  for  AI, would have an impact on the decrease of the 
gender gap, increase of female entrepreneurs and reduction of poverty.  
South Africa,  Lavina Ramkissoon, Ad visor African Union (Digitalization)  - Tech colonization is amplified 
through both offline and online, that prevents digital citizens participating in information and communications 
technology sectors due to infrastructure, politics,  or economic circumstan ces. We have a unique opportunity 
to contribute to the normative framework on equality, technology, innovation,  and education in the digital age. 
Examples include Digital Violence amongst youth, women,  and children.  
Australia,  Dr. Stephanie Camarena, Found er of Source Transitions (Education and literacy) Australia has a 
well-developed digital literacy program in a country where between 80 -100% of people have access to the 
internet and to both mobile and computers. Significant divide between regional and metr opolitan literacy, 
between younger and older people, education levels still exists. One of the difficulties to be analyzed  is the 
fact that the starting point for digital literacy is so widely spread from little access and resources to highly 
developed le vels of access therefore the priorities would be very different.  
Improved collaboration should come from forgetting about where we start from and to instead focus on the 
type of future we want to build. That would mean that different countries could work t owards a preferred state 
and that developing countries could leapfrog to ways of integrating Tech unimpeded by existing power 
structures and existing infrastructures.  
 
Summary of Issue1 recommendations:  
While digital literacy seems to be regionally oriented, geography alone is not the cause of digital disparity and 
illiteracy. It is important to recognize digital literacy as a social and resource inequality to support populations 
who are underserved. Regardless of their regions. F urther in vestment  in us able hardware needs to be 
implemented to prevent a significant barrier for children with disabilities in the UK , access  to basic services 
such as transport are also  faced with barriers in the digital context within Europe(Brussels, Portugal)  that affect 
vulnerable groups and the elderly. The upskilling in SMEs in a variety of global territories(Philippines, 
Bermuda, Myanmar) should target additional value creation in the innovation stages to support local 
economies and bridge the gaps.  
Additi onal support and awareness are needed within the farthest removed areas in Africa where people are 
unaware of the opportunities, which digital skills provide, but such unawareness exists in small communities 
within countries like Bulgaria, requiring a “hum an interface” to the digital divide.  Access to the internet needs 
to be made a basic need covered by human rights.  
 
Issue 2: Digital Literacy and AI - the Dawning of a New Age of Digital Societies /target:  Supporting global 
cooperation on Artificial Intel ligence/  
Background: The ability to understand, use, monitor, and critically reflect on AI applications without 
necessarily being able to develop AI models themselves  is commonly referred to as being “AI literate” (Long 
et al., 2021; Ng et al., 2021a).  
Some nations which are speeding up their AI strategies and developments will permanently increase the gap 
between nations – making some regions AI developing; others AI developed. The world map is being reshaped 
by these processes which is why a global collab oration on AI should be implemented and supported.  
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/03/without -universal -ai-literacy -ai-will-fail-us/ 
Jaisal  Surana, MKAI UK: “Corporations and nations are increasing and accelerating their investments in AI 
and how are various sectors going to be affected by the investment, should we consider that the UN needs to 
consider changes in the SDGs. The unifications i n definitions and standards happening in the background 
might be valuable but there ought to be a consideration for long -term strategies across the space.”  
 
Dr. Tuan Trinh, EIT Digital Hungary, “ Notable efforts and initiatives in Europe include, among others, the 
initiatives led by the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT), e.g. Cross -KIC Activity on 
Artificial Intelligence, AI on Demand platform, just to mention a few examples. ” 
 
 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 RECOMMENDATIONS/DISCUSSION  
 
Peru,  Andres Leon -Geyer, Pon tificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUCP  (Digitaliza tion) Outlined that 
there are groups which have access to the internet but have no literacy and there are areas with lack of access 
to the internet. For Peru “the unconnected” are not an exception but  a majority.  Exclusion has a strong effect 
on the economies – such as the purchase power compared to Geneva. Digital literacy needs to be clearly 
defined for everyone and as  we introduce new definitions such as “AI literacy” we need to be cognizant that 
access to the goods and services  of the internet is an ethical issue.  
Italy, Oleg Missikoff, Earth 3.0 Foundation (Education and lite racy)  as an expert in digitalization for Africa 
and Europe, Oleg noted that there are extremes of access and purchasing  power.  Mobile internet usage in 
Africa compared to the internet usage in Europe is quite expensive and unsustainable. But, on the other hand, 
there  are people in the world wondering how to deal with ChatGPT -4(noted as the other extreme). The solution 
to the prob lem is in “knowledge” so that people can take advantage of the digital economy and adaptive 
learning, upskilling across the entire spectrum from low educated to highly educated, who have learned under 
outdated school curriculums that no longer serve the cu rrent economic needs.  
South Africa,  Jessica Gardner, Worth Marketing Solutions  (Digitalization)   noted that access to the internet 
may indeed be a challenge due to things such as cost of internet (mobile and uncapped) and loadshedding of 
electricity in lon g intervals. Oftentimes there are barriers in developing solutions for the startup economy due 
to cultural disparity and lack of inclusion within funding the digital innovation sphere.  
Ecuador,  Maria Mac Andrew, Executive Director My Zalu/AIEthics.World  (Education and literacy)  shared 
recent experiences in working with educators who are reluctant to introduce digital technologies in Africa due 
to pessimism that  the social divides, which exist, may  be bridged . Such pessimism would prec lude students 
in rural schools in Africa (Zimbabwe) from being able to understand what a computer is, due to lack of basic 
access to technologies(a single computer). So, while there are currently ICT topics in education programmes 
for far -removed areas, th ere need to be “creative and inspirational” programmes for the teachers themselves, 
so that they may introduce digital skills to the far removed. Storytelling and prioritizing teacher education 
will be fundamental for the solution of these challenges.  
USA,  Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive  (Education and 
literacy)  noted that there are areas in the world(the Amazon) where digital education is perceived by local 
communities of native culture as imposition(due to anxiety of learning and unlearning). There needs to be a 
holistic  approach and understanding for the issues not only from  the “hierarchy of need” perspective, but 
from  a “hierarchy of emotions”  perspective.  
Bulgaria, Monika Manolova, Digital National Alli ance (Education and literacy)  Noted that some people in 
rural areas(farmers in  particular) do not believe that “digital is a solution to their problems” and 
rational /psychological reasons exist for that which need to be considered at least regarding educat ion 
systems.  
Mexico, Victor M. Larios, Universidad de Guadalajara, CUCEA Smart Cities Innovation Center,  
(Digitalization)   in Latin America,  in Mexico, in there have been extensive investments in AI Ethics, but it 
is still difficult to match the regulati on with the applications of the technology, and the velocity with which 
some people may lose their occupation when certain applications of artificial intelligence are introduced. 
Within Mexico there are 70% people with access to the internet, but it is mos tly utilized for social networks 
and there needs to be a guided approach to the application and deployment of artificial intelligence, which 
secures jobs and provides people with access to higher levels  of digital skills.  
Bulgaria,  Monika Manolova, Digita l National Alliance  (Digitalization)  noted that there are significant 
regional divisions in the world – with some areas facing difficulties in the bare minimum of access to the 
internet and then there are those already dealing with concepts such as AI and XR. 
Netherlands,  Haydee Shoembar, Kankan*Tree, Netherlands (Digitalization)   suggested a further discussion 
of the ethical elements,  where technological advancement should not be imposed on people, but at the same 
time we run the risk of continuously leavi ng people behind with the current speed of digital growth.  
USA, Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive 2030 (Education 
and literacy)  noted that the soft skills approach of “inviting” people to join in the digital evolutions might 
alleviate some of the “wicked problem” facets of the digitalization issue, where some populations may not 
want to be digitized.  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 Serbia, Miloš Dimitrijević, University of Kragujevac (Digitalization)  - According to FAO, the world 
population will reach over 9 billion by 2050, so we need more productive systems, which will at the same 
time protect the environment and optimize the use of resources. AI holds promise in addressing the challenges 
of this new paradigm. AI in the agricultural  sector offers the potential to feed an ever -growing global 
population and contribute to the achievement of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Because of 
that we need global support to build a long -term framework and strategy. International organ izations must 
adopt a unique framework in this segment, building some global platform for collaboration, as well as 
encourage innovative food hubs and guide FinTech companies in this area.  
The introduction of AI in agriculture, and other economic sectors , will be enabled by technological advances, 
including big data analytics, robotics, the Internet of Things, the availability of low -cost sensors and cameras, 
drone technology, and even widespread Internet coverage in geographically dispersed fields. FinTe ch 
companies should be encouraged to introduce technological innovations (precision agriculture). Special 
attention should be directed towards technological innovations for small farms, bearing in mind the costs of 
their introduction as a major obstacle.  
South Africa,  Lavina Ramkissoon, Advisor African Union (Education and literacy)  Digital literacy will be 
key in a world transformed by AI, therefore digital literacy must be taken seriously.  A beginning point is how 
to implement these skills in our social practices and bring these ideas into legislation. Today's adolescents are 
transitioning from childhood to adulthood in an era of rapid digitalization  in nanoseconds. Digital media are 
accessed through mobile phones, tablets, and computers and remain an imp ortant window into the world for 
adolescents. While levels of digital access and experiences of the digital world vary widely, adolescents are 
typically among the highest users of digital media. Young people often rely on smartphones to go online, but 
one third of school age children also have a fixed internet connection at home. Younger people also tend to 
spend more time online than older generations, by simple default education and awareness is critical inclusion 
into countries education policies.  
India,  Vibhav Mithal, IPR lawyer, Anand and Anand   To achieve global collaboration on AI, it is critical to 
first appreciate that AI, as on date, is a pattern recognition tool, which when combined with existing processes, 
helps humans achieve certain pre -determi ned and pre -defined objectives. AI which functions as a tool (known 
as Artificial Narrow Intelligence) must  be clearly distinguished from the aspirational goal of AI becoming as 
'intelligent' as a human (a concept known as Artificial General Intelligence).  Understanding this distinction 
would be an important step in promoting Digital Literacy and AI.  A facet of AI ethics, on the other hand, 
concerns the ethical choices which humans make while developing AI systems. If one is looking to achieve 
global colla boration on AI then we must be on the same page as to the meaning of AI as well as the impact 
AI systems may have. For example, the draft EU AI Act seeks to regulate the impact of an AI system by 
focusing only on the use of AI Systems and by introducing a risk categorization framework for such systems. 
However, The EU AI Act is only one approach to look at the impact of AI systems, and countries should be 
free to choose a mechanism that suits them the best.  Only from this basic agreement of the meaning of AI 
and the impact that AI systems may create, can we then have subsequent discussions of how the path to achieve 
global collaboration will unfold.  
Pakistan,  Ahmad Manzoor Founder & CEO Pakistan Blockchain Institute & AnZ Technologies  The 
convergence of di gital literacy and artificial intelligence (AI) is ushering in a new age of digital societies, 
where AI is increasingly used as a productivity tool. Digital literacy, which involves the ability to access, 
evaluate, and use digital information effectively, is becoming increasingly critical as AI usage becomes more 
prevalent. AI is transforming the way we work by automating repetitive tasks and enabling us to process vast 
amounts of data quickly. However, to maximize the benefits of AI as a productivity tool,  individuals and 
organizations must have the necessary digital literacy skills to effectively use and integrate AI into their 
workflow. With AI as a productivity tool, employees can free up time to focus on higher -value tasks, and 
organizations can improve  efficiency and effectiveness. As we continue to embrace AI as a productivity tool, 
it is essential to prioritize digital literacy to ensure that everyone can participate in and benefit from the new 
age of digital societies.  
 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 Summary of Issue2 recommendations  
The unconnected in some areas in the world are a majority and not a minority(Peru, South Africa) which 
creates cultural and social divisions, leading to pessimism even for educators(Zimbabwe) where digital 
literacy is concerned. Adaptive le arning, knowledge, and creativity for all social groups from and regional 
extremes needs to be introduced, due to the speed with which current education systems are becoming 
redundant in the face of AI(Earth 3.0, Italy, Africa).  
Rather than a swift and forceful digital inclusion a cultural invite approach should be implemented. And while 
certain parts of the world recognize and implement AI literacy to preserve jobs and upskill(Mexico), others 
view the access to the goods and services of the internet as a digital ethics issue.  
 
Issue 3: Tackling democratization of digital innovations as a public good. /target:  Building a more effective 
architecture for digital cooperation/  
Background: Digital innovations are siloed off and split in regions, geographies, and spheres. While the 
competitive nature of the digital market provides goods and services at better/competitive/ quality, 
collaboration, it is bridging differences, providing access which will support the betterment of everyone’s 
future – democratic valu es, shared standards, improved collaboration, improved markets.  
Global corporate investment in AI has reportedly reached US$60 billion in 2020 and is projected to 
more than double by 2025.  
https://www.brookings.edu/research/strengthening -international -cooperation -on-ai/ 
Into by Dr. Monika Manolova:  “There are economic framework and regional frameworks currently 
developed ac ross the globe(example – India’s AI strategies target the protection of jobs, China’s AI strategies 
target further economic growth and expansion of production), which define the future of Artificial Intelligence 
and digital literacy and place us on “rails '' with very little room for collaboration and inclusion. To 
democratize digital and artificial Intelligence innovation for the good of all, it is necessary to engage stakeholders 
from other underrepresented regions ”  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/DISCUSSION  
 
Peru, Andr es Leon -Geyer, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUCP  (Digitalization)  The 
democratization of digital goods and services needs to be approached from the perspective of a large -scale 
education programme (from the UN), which will help the terminology of AI to be better understood and not 
cause people to be misled.  
UK, Jaisal Surana, MKAI  (Digitalization)  People often understand computers and technology but not AI, 
there needs to be additional awareness about what AI applications capture and  how they use and reuse  it. At 
the same time tackling democratization could be supported by the inclusion of experts from a variety of expert 
fields in the development of regulations and to support the commonalities between the policies as the variety 
of countries analyze the problems within countries.  Further collaboration between tech experts and legal 
experts is necessary to support the collaboration between the frameworks.  
Netherlands,  George Beers, Wageningen University  (Econo my) the speed of digitaliz ation is higher than the 
traditional approaches to bringing innovations to society. Within the field of agriculture trust is a fundamental 
issue, where the utilization of digital technology is concerned. The establishment of excellence centers, centers 
of expertise and digital innovation hubs has shown to be successful due to the trust placed on local experts 
that are well -equipped to support bringing  the new technology to the farmers. Demonstration of the new 
technology close to the people you want to impa ct is of the most importance. While technological  
advancements are incredibly important, they can be a “zero -sum” game and it is important to address the 
downside as well as the advantages.  
USA , Dr. Ingrid Vasiliu Feltes, Founder & CEO Institute for Scienc e, Entrepreneurship,  and Investments ,  
(Economy)  Noted  that increased education efforts are required to optimize the level of global digital literacy 
and digit al fluency  related to the use of digital products and services solutions are crucial for success. 
Additio nally, there needs t o be a greater collaborative effort to  integrat e AI impact metrics, with  financial, 
operational, ESG(environmental , social and governance)  metrics as there are currently numerous silos that 
cause cyber -ethics vulnerabilities. Harmonization  and integrat ion have the potential to restore societal digital 
trust and facilitate trac king the true ROI(return of investment) for artificial intelligence (AI) deployment . 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 Special attention  to bioethics  in healthcare and life sciences is required to increase awareness about the need 
of “informed consent” and “dynamic consent” concepts  for h ighly sensitive genomic and precision medicine 
data sets.   A cohesive eff ort to uphold digital ethics, while optimizing enterprise AI deployments is a moral 
and business imperative.  
Bulgaria , Monika Manolova,  Digital National Alliance (Economy)  Noted tha t perhaps there are some 
intersections between segments which share a bond like agriculture and healthcare(the food we eat, being 
directly reflected in our health) and education and IT(the capacity for various domains to collaborate with 
digital technologi es) which may be explored to break down the silos between innovation segments(such as 
working groups).  
Hungary , Dr. Tuan Trinh, EIT Digital Hungary ( Digitalization )  As already noted earlier, the majority of 
Hungarian businesses are not exploiting the opp ortunities offered by digital technologies with only 34 percent 
of SMEs having at least a basic level of digital intensity, significantly below the EU average of 55 percent, 
which is confirmed by the DESI 2022 figures. It is recommended that Hungary to be more integrated in the 
European initiatives to strengthen digitalization in business sector. Initiatives like the EIT Strategic Regional 
Innovation Scheme (EIT RIS initiative from the European Institute of Innovation and Technology) in Europe 
should be imp lemented in other parts of the world as well to help the regions to strengthen its capability and 
digitalization  and innovation. Within the EIT family, EIT Digital, the largest digital innovation ecosystem in 
Europe, acts as “gateway” to European digital i nnovation. EIT Digital works hard for a strong digital Europe 
which is Inclusive, Fair, and Sustainable. Hungary hosts the EIT Digital Office in Budapest, corresponding to 
Region East.  
Peru,  Andres Leon -Geyer, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUC P (Educatio n and literacy )  
working groups may be further  analyzed but there should also be  a consideration for the difference between 
digital skill gaps and literacy a s literacy is another theme occurring in different countries and disciplines.  
Romania, Ana Prica Cruceanu, Association of Women in Engineering, Science and Technology (AFIST)  
(Digitalization)  outlined that there needs to be recognition for our own biases in the sphere of tech and that 
an elderly person from a village also needs to b e represented in national frameworks , while at the same time 
greater levels of transparency and explainability need to be provided in the field of artificial intelligence to 
prevent furthering the gaps.  
Serbia, Miloš Dimitrijević, University of Kragujevac (Digitalization)  - The barriers for improved 
collaboration between the countries are in regulation, different goals and view of policymakers, too big 
bureaucracy, decision -making power at all levels, not enough projects etc. The main drivers for improved 
digital collaboration may be in more projects in this area, harmonization regulation and globally framework 
of this topics, encouraging researchers to deal with this topic and networking researchers from all over the 
world among the some common bases of res earchers and not through some decision makers, networking and 
building some platform of producers, consumers, policymakers and researchers.  
Ireland,  Shaun Topham, DataVaults and PISTIS(Horizon project) (Digitalization)  A key building block in 
"digitalizati on with social values" is data. More equal access to data, particularly to personal data  is vital to 
prevent the evolution of a global data economy driven by more corporate and less social goals. This in turn 
shapes AI as wide access to data is a prerequi site. Digital SMEs find it harder to access data than they do 
finance. A  pathway for release of personal data for the public good should be developed.  
India, N. KISHOR NARANG,NARNIX Technolabs (Digitalization)  The artificial -intelligence industry is 
often compared to the oil industry: once mined and refined, data, like oil, can be a highly lucrative commodity. 
Now it seems the metaphor may extend even further. Like its fossil -fuel counterpart, the process of deep 
learning has an outsize environmental impact . Although AI presents transformative opportunities to address 
the earth’s environmental challenges, left unguided, it also has the capability to accelerate the environment’s 
degradation. There is a major hype to leverage AI to bring sustainability in diff erent aspects forgetting the 
extensive energy it consumes, in turn increasing GHG emissions and carbon footprint it adds to anything, 
when you apply AI to any product, system or solution. Environmental considerations should be an integral 
part of digital l iteracy  
UAE, Dr. Jane Thomason, Founder WMC (Digitalization ) First we need to address universal access to the 
internet. Gen Z and Gen Alpha will grow up with digital skills which. Older generations may miss out on. All 
education should teach kids from begi nning to code therefore, we need to give access to the digital tools and 
how to use them. Digital literacy in the Age of AI means transformation of economic segments as well. AI 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 will directly impact the income streams of accountants, doctors, lawyers, jour nalists, artists, professors, 
teachers and more. These professionals will need to evolve.  
Australia,  Dr. Stephanie Camarena, Founder of Source Transitions  (Digitalization) Noted that Digital 
literacy in the Age of AI means The ability to understand what AI  means for oneself and for the industry/sector 
in which you operate. This means the ability to also imagine what AI could do for you and your future. I would 
also say it is the ability to develop the muscle of critical thinking in an area which has deep et hical and social 
implications. There are opportunities for a greater level of development in all economic segments. However, 
AI applications are often developed in tech industries which are effectively disconnected from the industries 
themselves. Often thi s results in high tech solutions which do not match the type of problems that these 
industries face. In the food industries, AI and digital are bringing changes to agriculture (crop monitoring and 
precision agriculture), intelligent packaging to reduce foo d waste, precision health and nutrition, and others.  
 
Pakistan,  Ahmad Manzoor Founder & CEO Pakistan Blockchain Institute & AnZ Technologies As digital 
innovations continue to reshape society, it is essential to ensure that democratization is at the forefr ont of their 
development. This requires capacity building and product development as a public good. Capacity building 
refers to providing individuals and organizations with the skills and knowledge necessary to effectively use 
digital technologies. Product  development as a public good entails creating digital innovations that are 
accessible, affordable, and designed to meet the needs of all members of society. By investing in capacity 
building and product development as a public good, we can promote equitab le access to digital innovations, 
empower marginalized communities, and drive inclusive economic growth. It is essential to prioritize 
democratization in digital innovation to ensure that technology serves all members of society and does not 
exacerbate exi sting inequalities.  
 
 
Summary of Issue3 recommendations  
The combination of digital literacy with digital fluency is fundamental for every segment of th e economy and 
the integration of AI innovation in a meaningful way.  
There needs to be a clear delineation between digital skill gaps and digital literacy, which affect different 
economic segments and economic spheres, but collaboration will have to be est ablished between the fields to 
break down silos and to support the implementation of transdisciplinary and innovative digital standards. 
Within agriculture an approach which has proved successful is reliance on trusted professionals within 
excellence cente rs and digital innovation hubs which support the speedier acceptance of digital solutions via 
demonstration. Within healthcare, the solutions require understanding of “informed consent” and “dynamic 
consent”. Transparency and representation are quite impor tant towards the national frameworks, but there is 
also a need  to open regulatory and strategic frameworks in AI to expert overview.  
 
Summary of Consultation Recommendation  
 
While the world is connecting through digitalization, societies who lack it remain disconnected, accounting 
for the majority of people on our planet. (e.g. Peru, South Africa). This inequity disempowers people, 
especially educator s(e.g. Zimbabwe, Türkiye, Bulgaria, Romania) and  creates cultural and social divisions. 
While regional  differences are a significant factor in the analysis of digital literacy, the geography is 
sometimes secondary as literacy is an issue even within large metropolitan areas in the USA. Digital literacy 
should be connected to the UN SDG, becoming a basic hu man right on the principle of “leave no one 
behind”.Access to basic services predicated on digital literacy (such as transport, telecommunications and 
healthcare) is faced with barriers in the constantly evolving digital context throughout Europe (e.g. Bel gium, 
Portugal) that affects vulnerable groups and the elderly.  
 
Education and literacy  
▪ Additional support and awareness are needed within the farthest removed areas in Africa where people 
are unaware of the opportunities, which digital literacy provides, but such lack of awareness exists also 
in small rural communities within countries like Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, N. Macedonia, 
which requires a “human interface” to the digital divide.  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 ▪ Adaptive learning, knowledge, and creativity for all social groups and regional extremes(e.g. Italy, 
some African countries) need to be introduced, due to the speed with which current education systems 
are evolving too slowly in the face of AI (e.g. Generative AI applications, such as ChatGTP or the 
recently emergi ng  Emotion AI).  Methodologies which encourage augmented education,  higher order 
thinking skills and multimodal learning.  
▪ Rather than assuming every culture desires increasing digitalization  and forcing such solutions , digital 
inclusion and a cultural invite approach should be implemented. And while certain parts of the world 
recognize and implement AI literacy to preserve jobs and upskill ( e.g., Mexico), others view the access 
to the goods and services of the internet as a digital & AI ethics issue.  
▪ Further investment in user -friendly hardware needs to be implemented to prevent a significant barrier 
(for children with disabilities in the UK, disadvantaged schools in New York, the elderly in Portugal 
and Belgium).   
Economy  
 
▪ Within agriculture, manufacturing an approach which has proved successful is reliance on trusted 
professionals within excellence centers and digital innovation hubs which support the speedier 
acceptance of digital solutions via demonstration( e.g., Netherlands).  
▪ Digital literacy solutions should include explanations of "informed consent" and "dynamic consent." 
(e.g. in healthcare, agriculture and manufacturing). Even for highly educated executives these may be 
concepts that require further training.  
▪ To bridge the economic gaps and digital divide, various stages of innovation could provide additional 
value to support upskilling small and medium enterprises in global territories (e.g. Philippines, 
Bermuda, Myanmar)  
 
 
Digitalization  
▪ It is important to cle arly define digital skills, digital divide and digital literacy, AI literacy, which affect 
education, economic segments,  and spheres, to measure and resolve digital skill gaps.  
In addition, to provide the means for keeping up with the changing trends and tools in the marketplace 
and a mechanism for end -users to offer culture specific input.  
▪ Transparency, trust, representation, safety,  and security are quite important inputs for international 
digitalization strategies. When innovating, balance can be achiev ed through transparency, trust, safety 
and security, representation, as well as regulatory and strategic frameworks in AI/XR through 
transdisciplinary expert oversight. It is crucial to emphasize that policies and measures must be 
introduced and implemente d to ensure transparency, trust in AI applications. AI ethics should be 
seriously dealt with early on in the development phases of AI applications. Data security and privacy 
issues should be ensured and respected when implementing and running AI applicatio ns. In the country 
level, sovereignty should be respected.  
▪ Digital literacy and awareness together with Green AI should be properly addressed at multiple levels, 
ideally as early on as high school level, because “Green Literacy” is as important as Digital Literacy, 
keeping in mind the UN’s 17 sustainable development goals. We recommend that efforts need to be 
taken to ensure that Green Literacy and Digital Literacy should go hand in hand and future initiatives.  
▪ Guardrails need to be included within the real m of fast paced AI proliferation and its integration with 
social and education frameworks.  
▪ Additional collaboration will have to be established between a variety of education and economic 
fields to break down silos and to support the implementation of transdisciplinary and innovative digital 
standards.  
▪ This expanded digitalization must include mitigation solutions in alignment with CODES UN. 
Educating the end users about the impact of digitalization and engaging them for local innovative 
solutions. Development of educational programmes to understand the cost of digitalization for the 
environment (e.g. gamification , social, mass media) and provision of “how to use” frameworks for 
digital tools, which support sustainability.  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 ▪ Alternative solutions for lowering and/or removing barriers for digitisation, promoting equity and the 
provision of balance to  all actors and within all stakeholder should be an outcome of UN actions in the 
coming decade. These may include investment, global digital upskilling, drive sustained outcomes, 
have a society of intelligently augmented heroes, infrastructure with equal o pportunity given to all.  
 
Co-authors of the recommendations  
 
Consultation organizers and editors  
1. Dr. Monika Manolova, Digital National Alliance, Bulgaria  
2. Dr. Haydee Sh eombar, Kankan*Tree, Netherlands  
3. Jaisal Surana, MKAI, UK  
Consultation participants  
1. Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive,  USA  
2. Laura Babío, POLIS Network, Brussels, Belgium  
3. Mónica Rogério, ACDIPE, Portugal  
4. Richard Foster -Fletcher, MKAI, UK  
5. Daniel Opanubi, Omdena, Nigeria  
6. Jasen Tanev, Digital National Alliance/CyberClub, Bulgaria  
7. Dr. Tuan Trinh, EIT Digital Hungary, Hungary  
8. Andres Leon -Geyer, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUCP  
9. Oleg Missikoff, Earth 3.0 Foundation, Italy  
10. Jessica Gardner, Worth Marketing Solutions, Sou th Africa  
11. Maria Mac Andrew, Executive Director My Zalu/AIEthics.World, Ecuador  
12. Victor M. Larios, Universidad de Guadalajara, CUCEA Smart Cities Innovation Center, Mexico  
13. George Beers, Wageningen University, Netherlands  
14. Dr. Ingrid Vasiliu Feltes, Author and  Thought  Leader on Healthcare and Life Sciences, USA  
15. Ana Prica Cruceanu, Association of Women in Engineering, Science and Technology (AFIST), 
Romania  
16. Dr. Mulughe ta T. Solomon,PhD, Omdena -Milan C hapter; The Information Lab , Italy (Country of 
Origin - Eritrea) 
17. Edward Darling, LifeMap, UK  
18. Kristina Eskenazi, Chairwoman of the Management Board of  Health & Life Sciences Bulgaria, and 
Member of Manage ment Board of AI  Cluster Bulgaria   
19. Dimitar Dimitrov, Chairman of Management Board of  Health & Life Sciences Cluste r Bulgaria,  and 
Member of Management Board of AI Cluster Bulgaria  
20. Olivia Murungi, PEDAL Consulting, Slovakia  
21. Shaun Topham, DataVaults and PISTIS(Horizon project), Ireland  
22. Assoc. prof. Kosyo Stoychev, Sofia University Bulgaria  
23. Prof. Mohamed Essaaidi, IEEE Global Cities Alliance, Moroccan School of Engineering Sciences 
(EMSI), Morocco  
24. Gergana Passy, President, Digital National Alliance Bulgaria  
25. Gerry Copitch, MKAI UK  
26. Aleksandra Hadzic, MKAI UK  
27. Dr. Miloš Dimitrijević  , Research Associate at Faculty of Economics, University of Kragujevac, Serbia  
28. Massimo Rocchitta, LAORE  Sardegna  – Regional  Agency for Agriculture  Development  
29. delphine nyaboke, MKAI/Omdena, Kenya  
30. Lavina Ramkissoon, Advisor African Union (AU), Women in AI Ethics, Global AI Ethics Institute 
(GAIEI), Responsible AI Network (RAIN), Africa  
31. Prof. Markus Krebsz, UNECE GRM / The Human -Ai.Institute  
32. Dr. Meltem Huri Baturay / Prof., Director at the Center for Teaching & Learning, Atılım University / 
Founding Leader,  and President of LET -IN R &D, Türkiye  
33. Dr. Manijeh Motaghy, Program Director & Founder of  Perfectly Here, UCLA Mindfulness Instructor 
- United States  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 34. Oluwaseun Wey, Senior Project Manager, Nigeria Inter -Bank Settlement System  
35. N. KISHOR NARANG, Technology Philanthropist, Design Stra tegist & Architect, Innovation, 
Standardization & Sustainability Evangelist, NARNIX Technolabs, India  
36. Dr. Jane Thomason,  Founder of World Metaverse Council(WMC), Web3.0 Leader, Author, Futurist, 
UAE  
37. Dr. Stephanie Camarena, Founder of Source Transitions,  Researcher RMIT University , Australia  
38. Vibhav Mithal, IPR lawyer, Anand and Anand, India  
39. Ahmad Manzoor (Founder & CEO Pakistan Blockchain Institute & AnZ Technologies), Pakistan  
 
 
 