Contribution of Japan for the Global Digital Compact  
 
Introduction  
Japan  welcomes the opportunity to provide a written input into the process to develop Global 
Digital Compact  (GDC)  ahead of the United Nations (UN) Summit of the Future . 
Japan support s the initiative of the UN Secretary -General's Envoy on Technology to  solicit inputs 
from all stakeholders and ensure transparency and inclusivity in the UN ’s work . We emphasize the 
significance of multi -stakeholder approach as core value in policy making in digital and Internet 
related fields.  
Also, w e recommend that the work on GDC avoid duplication with other existing work  streams in 
this field and keep appropria te focus on ensuring the efficiency and effectiveness of the process. 
From this point of view, we propose the process of GDC respect the previous and existing works in 
this field both in public and private sectors, and endeavor to closely collaborate with other fora and 
international, regional and national stakeholders including international organizations.  
  
  
Connect all people  
Bridging the digital divide is a global challenge and it is necessary to ensure connectivity to the 
network s for all in a way tha t no one is left behind. To this end, promoting secure and resilient digital 
infrastructure is important as the basis for connectivity.  
 It is also essential to raise awareness not only of significance of digital connectivity , but also of 
network security,  data protection and cloud resilience, and to this end it is important to coordinate 
internationally to support countries , in particular developing countries,  in promoting network 
security, including through capacity building.  
 Japan supports developing countries and emerging economies to build secure  and resilient digital 
infrastructure, including through capacity building on cybersecurity e.g.  through cooperation and 
partnership with the private sector, international organi zations  and development agenci es. 
 Japan believes that people of all ages and backgrounds need basic digital  skills, to enable them to 
navigate an increasingly digitally connected world and to close  digital divides . 
 Japan supports other countries to increase digital access under princ iples of equity, universality and 
affordability while ensuring that security, interoperability, the protection of personal data and respect 
for human rights including gender equality are built into global connectivity . 
 Japan also believes open, interopera ble network architecture and supplier  diversi ty in ICT supply 
chains  through Open RAN will contribute to secure, reasonable construction of network 
infrastructure.  
 
Regulation of AI  
International discussions on the AI principles was initiated in 2016 and led to  the outcome s such as 
the OECD AI Principles in 2019 and the launch of the Global Partnership on AI, GPAI, in 2020.  
Japan believes that the OECD AI Principles are robust and reliable foundation to ensure an open and 
enabling environment for developme nt and deployment of AI that is grounded in human rights and 
democratic values.  
Currently, there are two major directions around governance of AI, with one towards legally 
binding regulatory approach and the other towards a non -regulatory approach . Japan believe s that it 
is important to maximize the benefits from innovation and to enable inclusive participation in global 
society and economy toward achievement of SDGs. Japan strongly supports multi -stakeholder 
approach in promoting global AI governance.  
 Taking the opportunity of G7 Presidency, Japan proposed and led the discussion on AI governance 
interoperability, which ensures transparency and mutual understanding across different AI 
governance frameworks. We keep our efforts to mainstream this policy in strument for development 
of global AI ecosystem which needs to be open, enabling and trustworthy for everyone in the world.  
G7 also launched G7 Hiroshima AI Process, which is expected to examine benefits and challenges of 
generative AI in an inclusive man ner and in collaboration with international organizations, and 
would be ready to make contributions to global discussions on the technology through this initiative.   
 
 
Avoid internet fragmentation  
Japan strongly supports  promotion of the open, free, global , interoperable, reliable, and secure 
Internet that supports innovation and strengthens respect for democratic values and human rights.  
In this regard, Japan is strongly committed to promoti ng one global, unfragmented Internet, and 
oppos ing Internet fragm entation as well as excessive government intervention such as Internet 
shutdowns and network restrictions . 
Japan reiterates the importance of working in multi -stakeholder approach for these objectives.  
With a view to promoting these policy principles, Japan is strongly engaged in hosting successful 
UN Internet Governance Forum, in October 2023 in Kyoto, in collaboration with national and 
regional communities as well as all stakeholders from around the world.  
 
 
 