1 
 
  
Submission to the Global Digital Compact  
Submitted by: Ahreum Lee1 
Note: The current submission is a n extract of the author’s PhD thesis on “International human rights 
law in digital space: an examination of the need for new legal measures for the protection of rights 
online” (PhD in international law obtained in 2020 at the Graduate Institute of International and 
Development Studies in Geneva, Switzerland ). Full version of the thesis is available online . 
1. The need  for reinterpretation and reimagining human rights in digital space  
1. Against the background of the i ncreased usage of ICTs and its impact on the way humans 
interact with one another, this Study examined whether we need a new set of norms or 
additional legal measures to protect the rights of individuals in relation to their activities online. 
The analysis  on the need for new legal  measures called for examining whether existing measures 
– both international human rights law and other legal measures – sufficiently address the 
changes in the nature of the impact and whether existing human rights principles and concepts 
require new int erpretation.  
2. Similar to other existing studies addressing digital rights, this Study also had first embarked the 
initial research on the widely discussed issues surrounding the right to freedom of expression 
online and the right to privacy. Indeed, those issues are at the heart of protecting rights online; 
however, throughout the research, it became clear that the two rights cannot be assessed alone 
and that other interlinked rights needed to be examined together. Particularly, by examining 
existing studie s, it was noted that the focus on the result of the impact that ICTs has on human 
beings led to an incomplete analysis as it overlooks the origin and the process that cause those 
impact (section 2.2.2). To address this point, this Study proposed a human ri ghts -based 
approach to the digital space as a framework to complement existing studies, taking into 
account the interdependent and interlinked nature of technologies and that of human rights 
(section 2.3).   
2. Attributes of the digital space and human rights  
3. The Study illustrated s everal complications associated with the protection of human rights in the 
digital space, starting from the observation that for an individual to enjoy freedom in the digital 
space, the constraints that need to be removed are differe nt from those of the offline 
environment (section 7.1.2), the lack of a State’s control of activities beyond borders (section 
5.3.4), to the complexity observed when information is stored, amalgamated and used (sections 
5.3.2 and 5.3.3). These complication s are closely related to and derived from the distinct 
features of digital information and its ecosystem which are the two main attributes of the digital 
space that impact the protection of human rights . They are: first, the need to embrace the 
expanded ro le of digital information beyond the widely recognized concept as a piece of 
knowledge and second, the specific features of the enabling environment that facilities digital 
information, namely, the dual functions of its components (section 10.1). These att ributes 
provide guidance to reinterpreting international human rights law in the context of the digital 
 
 
1 Ahreum Lee is a Human Rights Officer at the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
United Nations. The a uthor can be contacted at: ahreum.lee@un.org  
2 
 
 space and lead to the conclusion that we need to contextualize the principles of human rights 
law that we apply.  
2.1. Digital information, more than informa tion 
4. Simply put, digital information is a piece of information in digital form. Based on this primary 
definition of digital information, Chapters 3 to 6 introduced related concepts found in the 
international human rights treaties, which are related to conv eying facts, description, 
expression, or other messages and how those concepts remain equally applicable when it comes 
to new communication technologies. Particularly when the term, “all kind of media”, found in 
article 19 of the International  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) on freedom of 
expression and its counterpart provisions, is interpreted broadly to encompass innovative 
developments of ICTs, the digital form of information poses no barrier for protecting rights 
associated with informat ion such as freedom of expression and access to information.  
5. In addition to its function as a piece of knowledge, digital information constitutes a means to 
distribute knowledge and it also constitutes the environment that the means rely on. Digital 
infor mation is used as a tool to execute actions online and it is also the structure of the system 
in which it operates. Moreover, digital information represents the identity of individuals online 
and what individuals actually do online (section 7.1.2.2). There fore, the rights exercised online 
are realized by using digital information and the freedom enjoyed online is facilitated by using 
digital information one way or another. Departing from these broader functions of digital 
information, this Study focused on the digital format of data, namely, data that can be 
transmitted through an information system and those that are used as means for individuals to 
carry out online activities towards realizing and enjoying human rights online.  
6. In relation to the broader fu nction of digital information, the starting point of this Study was the 
widely accepted rule that online rights are as equally protected as their offline counterparts, Part 
II of this Study on human rights in the life cycle of digital information examined whether rights 
and freedom stipulated in existing human rights treaties are equally extended when those rights 
are exercised in digital form. The analysis centered on the purposes and functions of actions 
associated with human rights in the analog environm ent and how they are equally fulfilled and 
protected in the digital environment. In doing so, the Study applied the principle of functional 
equivalence used in electronic commerce law, which states that there is no difference between 
electronic commerce an d brick -and-mortar commerce in terms of their functions and no special 
treatment is required for electronic communications used in electronic commerce. When 
applied, the functional equivalent approach identifies certain criteria and conditions for digital 
communications to be treated as having functional equivalence with that of paper -based 
communications, for instance, telephone and Voice over Internet Protocol (e.g., Skype).  
7. However, the recognition of the functional -equivalence of rights online and offl ine and by 
extension, the protection offered in the existing human rights framework is not sufficient to 
answer in the affirmative the question whether the existing legal measures sufficiently address 
the changes in the nature of the impact on human rights  protection brought about ICTs. While 
there are no legal lacunae that would pose obstacles of a legal nature in implementing existing 
human rights obligations in the digital space, the current international human rights legal system 
needs to take into cons ideration how activities across the stages of the life cycle are inter -linked 
and how that translates into the interrelatedness of the rights involved. The lack of 
understanding would pose challenges in maintaining consistency of the implementation of 
huma n rights obligations, particularly when it comes to assessing how limitations of rights are 
justified (Chapter 8).  
3 
 
 8. The inter -linkage of rights and the magnifying or corollary impact on the restriction of one right 
on other rights are important aspects tha t need to be considered when assessing the 
justification of the measures taken to restrict a right (sections 4.5.1 and 8.3.2). Particularly, the 
transmission of digital information is not only limited to exercising certain rights, such as the 
right to free dom of expression, but impacts wider range of other rights . Individuals send, seek 
and receive digital information in various ways that equate to exercising several rights other 
than the freedom of expression. As introduced in Chapter 4, the acts of sendin g and receiving 
digital information equate to a range of rights from freedom of expression to the rights to 
assembly and association and to economic, social and cultural rights. It follows that blocking the 
transmission of digital information from being se nt or received constitutes an infringement of 
other rights. For instance, by disconnecting the access to the Internet, not only does it limit the 
exercise of freedom of expression but it also limits all rights, which rely on the transmission of 
digital inf ormation through the Internet. Therefore, the limitation needs to be assessed as a 
whole after having identified impacts from various limitations on rights. Further, the adoption of 
the functional -equivalent approach should not result in imposing a more st ringent standard then 
that of its counterpart analog method. It would be overly positive to hope that the problem that 
persists and which is still without a solution in the traditional paper -based world could be solved 
in the digital world.  
9. The corollary impacts on other rights are also identified in the disposal stage (Chapter 6). All 
activities in the digital space are based on digital information and when information is not 
available or not accessible, all activities online that evolve around the inform ation are limited or 
cannot be carried out. In turn, the deletion of the content of information or the link to the 
information in certain situations amounts to a limitation to exercise rights online, particularly 
those related to receiving digital informat ion and usage stage (section 6.2.2). Therefore, 
ascertaining the justification of interference with the transmission of digital information should 
not be limited to freedom of expression or privacy as the transmission involves and implicates 
the exercise o f other rights and should not be limited to those rights (section 6.3.1).  
2.2.  Digital information ecosystem – “Jekyll and Hyde”  
10. Digital information and its life cycle rely on a massive system composed of interconnected 
elements, all of which interact to enab le the flow of digital information. Part III focused on this 
supporting environment - what this Study refers to as “digital information ecosystem” (section 
2.3.2) and how the access to the layers of ecosystem enables individuals to freely exercise their 
rights online and at the same time, restrict and limit those rights. Understanding these attributes 
of the digital information ecosystem is critical to clarify the contents of the human rights 
obligation of duty -bearers in the digital space.  
11. For individuals to enjoy freedom in the digital space, the constraints that need to be removed 
and the safeguards that need to be guaranteed are different from those of the offline 
environment. Freedom in the digital space requires a new understanding in l ight of digital 
technologies and the environment that supports those technologies. As illustrated in Chapter 7, 
each segment of the digital information ecosystem constitutes an enabling factor for individuals 
to perform activities online. Specific examples  of interferences with rights were illustrated 
according to the layer of access that constitutes the digital information ecosystem and that form 
preconditions for ordinary users to conduct any activity online (section 7.1.2.1). These layers are: 
access to the physical device that allows individuals to create information in digital form and to 
connect to the digital world; access to the Internet through telecommunication infrastructures; 
and access to the online platforms where individuals can upload or send  digital information; and 
the access to online contents to receive information in digital format and authorization to read 
the content.  
4 
 
 12. These layers are like a coin with two sides: on the one hand, they are necessary enablers of 
online rights, and on the other hand, by restricting or blocking access to those layers, they lead 
to interference with or limitation of human rights. For instance , the technical devices, which 
constitute part of the ecosystem, serve a dual purpose - they can restrict access to entire 
websites, types of online services, specific pages or content within websites or webpages 
containing specific keywords. Filtering tec hniques developed initially to shield children from 
inappropriate content or help businesses block their employees from disclosing confidential 
information can also be used to block social, religious and political content. The four pre -
requisite accesses a re needed for performing human rights related activities online and can 
amount to both enablers and limitations for rights online (section 7.1.2). Therefore, one access 
out of the four, namely the access to the Internet, is not adequate to address the prot ection of 
rights online in the digital information ecosystem which is broader than the Internet (section 
7.1.1.1).  
13. The dual functions of digital technology and the digital ecosystem is relevant to international 
human rights law as it impacts assessment of  legitimate restrictions to rights online particularly 
those involving interception, collection and blocking of digital information. A first example 
concerns collection and processing of digital information. The reasons for collection can be 
legitimate in order to fulfill the obligations of certain human rights treaties, for instance, by 
collecting relevant information about a specific group that may be in vulnerable situations and 
processing it to disaggregate the information to be used as a basis for esta blishing a policy 
(section 5.2.1). However, the same technical act, if used in a different context with a different 
aim, can amount to negative impacts such as a chilling effect on the exercise of rights online and 
interference with various aspects of the right to privacy (section 5.2.2). The second example 
relates to the technique used to rectify data. While the request to rectify data is an act to 
address the infringement of the right to privacy, the act itself, in a technical sense, is the same as 
the ce nsorship or blocking of information in certain situation (section 6.2.2).  
14. Due to the organic way the Internet and its usage have developed, the existing regulatory 
framework is fragmented with certain regulations covering a specific layer or component of the 
digital information ecosystem such as the telecommunications industry and content regulation. 
The digital space is not anarchy and despite different schools of thought on whether the Internet 
should be regulated (section 7.2.2), the digital space is de facto  regulated as there are physical 
infrastructures (cables, devices and routers) that are bound by traditional telecommunication 
rules and regulations. Contrast to the concerns put forward that the digital space is functioning 
separate from the real wo rld, regulation in the online environment is little different to regulation 
in the real world. Existing human rights norms, particularly those originating from the normative 
content of certain rights can be adapted to the digital context – these include: a vailability of 
infrastructure and services; physical and virtual accessibility; secure and safe access; 
acceptability; affordability and non -discrimination and net neutrality (section 7.3.1). At the time 
of writing this Study, it is true that certain aspec ts of these human rights norms, particularly the 
availability and affordability of infrastructure and devices, are premature to be recognized as 
being part of human rights obligations. However, the international human rights law is a 
framework which accomm odates the development of human rights obligations as the role of 
ICTs find its place in human lives. Section 7.3.2 introduced elements of what constitutes essence 
of a right in digital space as a way of starting the discussion on those human rights obliga tions, in 
other words, whether access to the digital information ecosystem constitutes basic needs and 
warrants a status of minimum level of access.  
3. The need for reinterpretation of the right to privacy in digital space  
5 
 
 15. The attributes of the digital space  that impact the protection of human rights led to the 
conclusion that we need to contextualize the principles of human rights law that we apply. The 
main change in nature that impacts the enjoyment and protection of human rights online 
centers on the prot ection of the right to privacy in terms of spatial privacy concerning the extent 
to which private sphere of life are protected for infringement and informational privacy 
concerning the control over the flow and management of digital information. Moreover, the 
changes to the nature of risks affect the expectation of privacy protection in the digital space.  
3.1. Spatial privacy  
16. The spatial element of the right to privacy is most prominent at the creation and transmission 
stage of the life cycle which straddle betw een the sphere of creator’s control in private sphere 
and outside the individual’s control. The first stage of the digital information life cycle deals with 
created information within the control of the individual – both virtually and physically. As a basi c 
requirement, creating digital information involves having access to a device that would allow 
individuals to create information in the digital form which can be automatically connected to a 
network (e.g., a mobile phone connected to telecommunication net work). Individuals can create 
digital information by using third -party online services (e.g., email) or by using services that are 
available offline, without needing to access the Internet (section 3.3.1). Individuals believe that if 
the information is sto red in a device such as a phone in bags or computers in homes, it is within 
the individual’s private sphere. However, the information, which appears to be stored in the 
devices within your control, is also stored elsewhere on a database outside of the priv ate area of 
one’s control. Most often, there is a copy of information stored in a third party database and 
thus the third party has access to that information.  
17. Traditional interpretations of how the two spaces – public and private spheres - are demarcated  
do not work in digital space (section 3.3.2). It is not clear whether existing international human 
rights law covers the way in which digital space creates various combinations where a mix of 
private and public, as well as workspace, interplay and whether  the protection offered under the 
right to privacy framework sufficiently addresses these combinations. Consider for instance, 
“quasi -private” spaces where there is a mix of public and private space: these are situations 
where individuals use personally ow ned devices and have control over their activities but 
physically are not in private space, leaving them open for other individuals to observe their 
online activities. The mixture of spheres created by the interplay of layers of digital information 
ecosyst em lead to legal gaps for the protection of human rights online and hence, a new 
approach is required for the interpretation and implementation of the protection of privacy in 
the digital space. This would not call for a new legal instrument but would requ ire a shift in 
paradigm to understand what is private and what is public in the digital space.  
18. A proposal is made to define the private sphere as a virtual area where the individual has control 
over the digital contents that he or she created and has cont rol over how to transmit, store or 
dispose of this information. The proposed threshold for the distinction is based on the notion of 
control, identifying the information that is purely within the private sphere and control of the 
individual as being in pri vate sphere and the information of which the control is shared with a 
third party, which is the situation at the transmission stage, as being in the public domain. 
Application of this proposal identifies two points in the flow of digital information that c an be 
considered as the point where the individual relinquishes control over information and control 
over information from the creator or owner of the digital information shifts to a third party 
(section 3.3.2.3). The first is the point where the created d igital information is stored online in a 
third -party storage as opposed to in personal digital storage, for instance, saved on a personal 
laptop. The second point is the point where the individual perceives that the digital information 
is sent and has left  the control of the creator. These two points where the control over 
6 
 
 information shifts to a third party as well as those points to be identified along with the 
development of technology should be taken into account as a standard of protecting rights 
onlin e.  
3.2. Informational privacy  
19. Another recurring discussion is the expansion of the scope of the right to privacy to include 
informational privacy including the right to request for deletion of personal information. The 
right to informational privacy is general ly understood to mean that i ndividuals as the owners or 
creators of digital information have the right to know whether and when their digital 
information is modified or altered. Individuals have the right to control and to be informed of 
any changes to the  flow of digital information. It has been suggested that clarification on the 
interpretation of the right to privacy is required to explicitly acknowledge informational privacy 
as being part of the scope of right to privacy, particularly when it comes to c ontrol over digital 
information and storage of digital information by third parties. Chapters 3 to 6 examined 
whether this blanket approach of simply reinterpreting the right to privacy would be necessary, 
by breaking down the elements of informational pri vacy at each stage of the life cycle and 
checking whether those elements are already covered in the current interpretation and 
implementation of the right to privacy.  
20. The notion of informational privacy differs from the perspective of the individual sende r who 
sends information and the individual who passively receives digital information. From the 
perspective of the recipient, informational privacy concerns the autonomy of the recipient to 
determine when, how and to what extent others use information abou t the recipient (section 
4.3.3). The act of receiving information can amount to a violation of the right to privacy, in 
particular, the right to be left alone in the digital space and to live with minimum interference. In 
the event the digital information is intercepted at one point during transmission, the individual 
has the right to know when and by whom the interception has been made (section 5.2.3.3). 
More specifically, the individual involved should be informed of who has accessed his or her data 
and i f this has occurred without their permission, the individual is entitled to know which 
authority has granted permission or accommodated access and the reasons behind the decision 
to allow access. The sender, recipient and owner of information should be pre sented with the 
information about the process of filtering, blocking and otherwise restricting the flow of 
information (section 4.4.1).  
21. These elements of informational privacy are not new to international human rights law. 
Particularly, when we look at th e discussion surrounding the interference with the right to 
privacy, the UN Human Rights Committee and different judicial mechanisms have interpreted 
that the storage of personal information and control over that information are covered within 
the scope of  article 17 of the ICCPR on the right to privacy and its counterpart provisions in 
regional treaties. The collection of personal information or any information produced as a result 
of individual users’ online activities constitutes interference with the ri ght to privacy. In addition 
to the passive nature of the right to privacy concerning the collection of personal information, 
the question remains whether individuals have the right to ascertain what happens after their 
personal information is collected. Th e right of access to information in connection with article 17 
of the ICCPR on the right of privacy implies that individuals have the right to know which 
personal data is stored and which authorities have access to such data.  
22. Furthermore, the concepts rel ated to disposal of digital information – introduced in Chapter 6 - 
ranging from the right to be forgotten, the right to erasure, among others, are equally not new; 
they are called with different names but have the common point that all refer to the elemen ts of 
rectifying information about oneself and the right to dispose of information about oneself, 
which are found within the realm of the right to privacy. The elements of rectifying or 
7 
 
 eliminating digital information constitute corrective measures to addr ess infringement of various 
aspects of the right to privacy, including personality rights and informational autonomy. The 
existing international human rights treaties provide a legal framework in which individuals have 
ways to rectify the infringement of t heir right to privacy in certain circumstances.   
3.3. Expectation of privacy  
23. Another important change in the nature of impact on human rights is the objective expectation 
of privacy provided for in the digital information ecosystem. The expectation of privacy in the 
digital space is closely related to the design and the components of the digital information 
ecosystem. Depending on the architectural design of the network through which the digital 
information travels, there are several points within the digital i nformation ecosystem where 
information may be blocked and censored (section 7.3.1). First, information can be prevented 
from being sent by certain functions and restrictions embedded in the technological equipment 
itself. Software that is automatically and  mandatorily installed on a laptop or a smartphone prior 
to purchase may restrict users from dispatching certain text messages by blocking certain 
country codes or phone numbers in the destination numbers and filtering certain words. At the 
level of the ne tworks and infrastructure, equipment or computer networking devices such as 
routers, proxy servers, firewalls, and wireless access points may contain functions to track user 
activity and store personal information and communication. Security methods, such as network 
packet filtering, which control what information can flow into and out of the network are some 
of the examples that provide this functionality. Further, at the level of an online platform, the 
behaviors of individuals on the site can be monitore d and collected in the form of data. The 
online platform itself, as a space of its own regulation, may have access control schemes where 
granular access control management is employed to restrict certain individuals to a particular 
space in that online pla tform.  
24. These points within the digital information ecosystem where digital information is blocked 
interferes with right to privacy during the transmission stage (sections 4.2.4, 4.3.3, and 4.4.1). 
The change in the nature is related to that fact that the flow of digital information does not 
follow the territorial boundaries that we know in the physical world and hence, it inevitably 
results in situations where foreign actors can infringe privacy rights of non -citizens (section 
5.3.4). The law would not be able to change how the digital industry functions and how the 
digital information flows through different routes passing through various territories. Most 
importantly, a legalistic approach to addressing this issue is probably not effective let alone 
welco med by industry players. The role of the law, at least in the digital space, should respond to 
the changes that market and the people have accepted so that individuals are free to exercise 
their rights online. This starts with applying current legal measur es, for instance, safeguards 
against risks and abuses developed in surveillance regime cases and existing data protection 
principles with greater emphasis on durability, veracity, sensitivity and non -rivalrousness of 
digital information (section 8.4.1).  
25. Another related change in nature that impacts expectation of privacy is the diversified ways to 
collect digital information and how these ways can lead to disclosure of unexpected information. 
The ways of collecting digital information still remains the same  as analog collection: get the 
information directly from the source or from a third party who legitimately or illegitimately has 
the information or alternatively, eavesdrop and tap into communication means used by the 
source. In the digital form, these met hods of collection translated into voluntary and involuntary 
collection from the source; collection of information in transit; collection from third -party 
storage and transfer of collected information (section 5.3.3).  
26. What is different from the analog col lection is the scale of data collected and how the scale 
impacts disclosure of certain types of information.  The current digital space evolves around the 
8 
 
 concept of big data which is about predictions and applying math to huge quantities of data in 
order t o infer probabilities, the default norm is to collect as much data as possible so that the 
samples will reflect reality more accurately. More data is better for “big data” and there is a 
tendency to collect as much data as possible irrespective of the purp ose of the collection 
(referred to as “blanket interception or collection”). Irrespective of the composition, digital 
information can unintentionally or at times, intentionally, reveal or disclose private and personal 
information when collected data is pro cessed. Personal information can be revealed from 
seemingly insensitive information, and seemingly anonymous data can be linked to explicit 
information identifying the person associated with the data. Therefore, it is important to 
understand how the collec tion and processing of information can lead to a disclosure of personal 
and sensitive information and subsequently, impact and infringe the right to privacy (section 
5.3.2).  
4. The need for recognition of new human rights actors in the digital space  
27. Based on these two analytic frameworks to identify gaps relating to the protection of human 
rights online  (namely, the digital information and digital information ecosystem) , the Study 
focused on whether there was a change in the nature of the impact that digital t echnologies 
have on the exercise of human rights online and whether those changes call for new substantive 
legal measures as opposed to procedural measures. The scope of existing international human 
rights law - composed of treaties and decisions of human rights bodies - are sufficiently broad to 
cover the usage of digital information as a means of exercising rights and as the exercise of rights 
themselves. However, despite interpreting human rights in the context of the digital space, there 
still exist gap s and concerns when it comes to the role and responsibility of non -State actors in 
the digital space, particularly, the power and control that they exercise over the flow of digital 
information. The State -centric international law, still dominant in the 21st century, does not 
establish clear human rights obligations of actors other than States and hence, there is a need to 
recognize new human rights actors in the digital space.  
28. Contextualizing certain principles of international human rights law does not ad dress the human 
rights protection gaps found in the digital space, namely, that the current international human 
rights system does not have rules and safeguard to monitor all human rights actors or actors 
that have functional roles which involve effective control over digital information (section 9.3.2). 
As argued in Part II of this Study, no substantive changes to human rights protection are required 
as the existing international human rights law extends to the protection of human rights online. 
However, t he anomaly of existing international human rights law when applied to the digital 
space is the existence of non -State human rights actors that function as gatekeepers or the 
master -switch of the digital space exerting control and influence over how individ uals exercise 
and enjoy rights online.  
29. This Study unfolded the presence and function of non -State human rights actors in the digital 
space by examining the r aison d’être for their existence (section 7.1). As digital information 
cannot be created or transm itted autonomously, it relies on the ecosystem composed of 
equipment, devices, infrastructure, and users. The digital information ecosystem that supports 
online activities is like an onion and the layered nature of its architecture poses a challenge for 
individuals to understand activities at deeper layers of the Internet that govern the exercise and 
enjoyment of their rights online. The complicated machinery behind the life cycle of digital 
information makes the ordinary individual users unaware of who is involved in setting the 
conditions for the digital information to travel and who has access to that information. For 
individuals to fully enjoy their rights online, we need to understand who facilitates or impedes 
the exercise of these rights. Chapter 9 of  this Study addressed the question of who are the actors 
9 
 
 that impact human rights online based on the proposed notion of effective control over the flow 
of digital information.  
30. There are third -party actors at the backend of the machinery who carry out functions that 
facilitate digital information and operate and control the ecosystem – referred to as the “the 
invisible hands” (section 4.5.2). Due to their involvement, control ove r digital information is 
often shared with third parties that individuals are unaware of and the initial creator or owner of 
the digital information does not have control over it once it is voluntarily shared or forcefully 
released. The roles of third part y service providers have expanded from assisting communication 
to actively censoring and limiting the information that is sent and becomes available for the 
public. Third party service providers can dictate the criteria and requirements for digital 
informa tion to be intercepted because they have de facto  access to the digital information. 
Problems arise as third party entities interpret those limitations in lieu of the judiciary and those 
private entities have enforcement powers as gatekeepers of the networ k and the platforms. In 
the digital space, entities that carry out the role of government in establishing the rule of law 
online are not only limited to States but can be also business entities or even individuals.  
31. The dynamic nature of the digital inform ation ecosystem and the way it has evolved with little 
State involvement created a new typology of human rights actors (section 9.1.2). The needs of 
the digital information society led to the creation of new actors, such as technical 
standardization entiti es, who participate alongside business manufacturers in quasi -legal 
decision -making processes that impact the behavior of users through their control over the flow 
of digital information. These new types of actors do not fit into the traditional categories  of the 
subjects of international law and hence, international law does not address their human rights 
obligations and responsibilities. Further, existing types of actors – such as business enterprises 
and individuals – are also excluded from the debate on  the subjects of international law and are 
subject to a different legal regime such as the on -going negotiation on a legally binding treaty 
process for business enterprises. When it comes to individuals as subject of international law, 
the discussion is li mited and the capacity of individuals in the digital space has not yet been 
considered.  
32. The Study highlighted that natural persons who use the system or those who provide the 
products or services that form the ecosystem are also an important element of the  digital 
information ecosystem (section 9.1.3). The Internet is an open architecture with “end -to-end” 
design allowing anyone to join and develop. In non -technical terms, this means that the original 
designers of the ecosystem embraced a design that opted for decentralized control of the 
ecosystem where the end -users have control of how they interact with the ecosystem. This 
feature of the digital technologies enables individual users to do many things without the 
assistance of government or businesses. Ind ividuals can be involved in operating critical 
functions of the digital ecosystem and individuals are also a part of the invisible hands behind 
the system.  
33. Identifying actors in international human rights law does not equate to listing all the actors in 
the ecosystem. To determine which actors in the digital ecosystem are actors with human rights 
obligation, it is proposed to assess the impact of functions on  the enjoyment of rights (section 
9.3.2). The main threats to human rights online are associated with the flow of digital 
information and its life cycle. By examining the capacity of each component of the ecosystem to 
control the flow of digital informatio n, and identifying the actors responsible for each 
component, we can discern which components have an impact on human rights and which 
actors in the ecosystem have the capacity to harm (or protect) human rights. This Study 
proposed that States recognize hu man rights actors in the ecosystem that carryout functions 
which to threaten (or promote) enjoyment of human rights and establish safeguards to make 
sure that those actors respect human rights standards.  
10 
 
 34. All human rights actors that perform functions crit ical to the operation of the digital information 
ecosystem are in a position to control the flow of digital information, and therefore negatively 
impacting or promoting the enjoyment of individual rights online. Additionally, by virtue of that 
control, the  same actors are in a position to regulate the behavior of individual users in the 
system; their controlling function has a legal effect. In the current digital society, within the 
confines of the ecosystem, private entities or third parties have establish ed and implemented 
internal codes of conduct and procedures, even though the legitimacy of the procedures and 
those responsible for implementing them have never been made clear. Several questions and 
concerns arise with regard to the legitimacy of human ri ghts actors that de facto  carry out 
critical functions in the digital ecosystem. It is therefore pertinent to ascertain whether the 
human rights actors in question have the legitimate authority and status to create norms and 
rules that govern and regulate the behavior of individual users or other actors and whether 
those norms and rules are legitimate. Such need is even more pertinent as the digital industry 
has moved towards “semantic web” where machines – semantic search assistances such as Siri 
on Apple devices - play an important role controlling the selections and personalization of user 
selectivity.  
35. The answer lies in States’ recognition that those actors with effective control over the flow of 
digital information have are human rights actors having o bligations under international human 
rights law. States should recognize these entities as human rights actors and individual rights 
holders should be aware of these new human rights actors, the functions they fulfill, and the 
impact of those functions on rights. To assist States to recognize this, it is suggested that the 
international human rights system can as a first step, produce an authoritative guidance on how 
rights stipulated under existing international human rights treaties are manifested and pro tected 
in the context of digital space and require States to report on their human rights obligations in 
digital space (section 9.3.3).  
 
 
 
 