 
 

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
2 Table of Contents  
Acknowledgements  
Authors  
Abbreviations  
Executive Summary  
 
Part 1: Introduction  
1.1 | Evolution of Global Digital Governance: A Brief Background  
1.2 | Objective: Support the Building of a Global Digital Governance Architecture  
1.3 | The Contemporary Setting: The Time is Now  
 
Part 2: Mapping & Methodology  
2.1 | Mapping Contemporary Global Governance Initiatives  
2.2 | Determining Criteria: What Makes an Initiative?  
2.3 | What the Mapping Reveals  
 
Part 3: Sectoral  Initiatives: Key Findings  
3.1 | A Comprehensive Analysis: Decoding Sectoral Trends  
 3.1.1 | Private -Sector led Initiatives  
3.1.2 | Government -led Initiatives  
3.1.3 | Civil Society and NGO -led Initiatives  
3.1.4 | Multi -stakeholder Initiatives  
3.2 | Overa rching Trends Across Sectors  
 
Part 4: Next Steps: Preparing for an Inclusive Digital Future  
4.1 | An Inclusive Approach to Norm -Setting  
4.2 | Where Digital Rights Meet National Responsibilities  
4.3 | A Case for Multi -stakeholderism as a Priority for Effectiveness  
4.4 | Further Research via a Subsequent Practicum  
 
Part 5: Conclusion  
Appendix: List of Initiatives  
Bibliography  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
3 Acknowledgements  
 
We would like to thank Megan Roberts , Director of Policy Planning at the United Nations 
Foundation, for posing a thought -provoking and critical prompt that initiated this practicum. We 
are grateful for the crucial opportunity, insight, advantageous direction and introduction to a 
network of invaluable experts that supported our work, from fou ndational research to final 
report. Her guidance allowed us to create a report that reflected the pragmatic ways in which 
digital governance initiatives can be effectively instilled.  
 
The authors would like to express our deepest appreciation to our panel of expert, who provided 
helpful feedback and crucial inputs: Yu Ping Chan , Senior Programme Officer in the Office of 
the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology at the United Nations, Lani Cossette , Senior 
Director and Chief of Staff of Microsoft’s United Nations office, Melike Yetken Krilla , Head of 
International Organizations at Google, Sheetal Kumar , Head of Global Engagement and 
Advocacy at Global Partners Digital, Stephanie Borg Psaila , Director for Digital Policy at 
DiploFoundation, and Professor Pana yotis Yannakogeorgos , clinical associate professor and 
program director for the NYU SPS Center for Global Affairs’ MS in Global Security, Conflict, and 
Cybercrime (GSCC). Their invaluable commentary furthered our research and offered deep 
insights into the  priorities and challenges across the digital governance landscape, with acute 
awareness of needs within the private sector, governments, and civil societies.  
 
Finally, we would also like to acknowledge –with much appreciation –the crucial role of Professor  
Waheguru Pal S Sidhu , whose oversight, mentorship, and encouragement at every stage of 
the practicum made this report possible.  
 
 
 
 
      
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
4 Authors  
 
Sarah Collins -Fattedad  is a student at New York University’s Center for Global Affairs pursuing 
a Mast er of Science in Global Affairs (MSGA) and specializing in International Development and 
Humanitarian Assistance. After acquiring her undergraduate degree from the University of 
Calgary (Canada) in International Relations, she undertook an internship at th e United Nations 
Headquarters in New York. The internship blossomed into experience at three different offices 
over the course of 16 months: i) Office of the Special Coordinator for Improving the UN’s 
Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, ii) Division  for Inclusive Social Development, iii) 
Indigenous Peoples and Development Branch. Upon graduation, she hopes to return to a career 
in inclusive international development focusing on marginalized persons, making sure no one is 
left behind.  
 
Michael DeVito  is a student at New York University’s Center for Global Affairs pursuing a  
MSGA with a Peacebuilding concentration and a United Nations specialization. After receiving a 
Bachelor of Arts from Hofstra University studying Anthropology with an Archaeology  
concentration and minors in European Studies and Drama, Michael went on to serve as an  
AmeriCorps Volunteer Tutoring and Mentoring at risk youth in Napa, California for one year, and 
then to serve as a Peace Corps Volunteer as an English Language Facilitator in the Kingdom of 
Tonga for two years. Since then, Michael has worked at PAX - Program of Academic Exchange, 
Friends of Tonga, Inc, and Global Cities, a program of Bloomberg Philanthropies. Michael will 
be graduating this May and plans to continue to work w ith international organizations in both 
development and peacebuilding sectors.  
 
Yasmin Góes  is a Brazilian Lawyer, who graduated from the University of Brasília (UnB). She  
has specialized in Constitutional, International, and Public Law. Currently, she is a student at 
New York University’s Center for Global Affairs pursuing a MSGA, focusing on International Law 
and Human Rights. She has worked as a lawyer both in the private  and public sector in Brazil, 
published books and articles in the law and international relations field, and has also 
participated in leadership events in the U.S., Portugal, and China. While in her home country, 
she advocated for human rights and worked c losely with Federal Public Defenders in Supreme 
Court cases on social security, international law and extradition.  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
5 Mariam Khorenyan  is currently a student at New York University’s Center for Global Affairs 
pursuing a MSGA with a concentration in Transnat ional Security and a specialization in Global 
Risk. Mariam received her Bachelor of Arts in Justice, Law, and Criminology from American 
University. While studying in Washington D.C., she interned at several federal and local 
organizations including the Dep artment of Homeland Security, the Department of Justice and 
the D.C. Public Defender’s Service. After acquiring her Bachelor’s degree, Mariam enlisted in 
the Peace Corps as an English Education & Youth Development Volunteer in the Republic of 
Georgia. In a ddition to her studies at NYU, she is a Peace Corps Coverdell Fellow, a USAID 
Payne Fellow and serves as the president of the Student Association for Global Affairs. After 
completing her program at the CGA, Mariam will enlist in the USAID Foreign Service a nd will 
continue pursuing her interests in conflict resolution abroad.  
 
Leila Milgrim  is the Senior Director of CNX Portfolio and Global Brand Solutions at Condé 
Nast. Her role sits at the intersection of editorial and commercial, and she creates culturall y-
relevant and groundbreaking global programs with touchpoints in all of Condé Nast's 32 
markets. Leila has spent the last decade writing and innovating initiatives for publishers like 
Condé Nast Traveler, SELF, and Rolling Stone. Her career has spanned ca tegories and 
continents, and she values the meaningful perspective that her five years living in Italy brought 
to her strategic acumen. Leila’s time abroad inspired her to utilize her understanding of effective 
content marketing tactics in a way that harne sses influence. It led her to pursue her MSGA at 
New York University’s Center for Global Affairs, with a concentration in International Relations 
and Global Futures and a specialization in the United Nations. She holds a Bachelor of Science 
from the Univer sity of Florida where she majored in Journalism with a concentration in 
Entrepreneurship.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
6 Abbreviations   
 
Artificial Intelligence (AI)  
European Union (EU)  
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)  
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)  
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)  
Least Developed Countries (LDCs)  
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)  
Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development (OECD)  
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)  
United Nations (UN)  
United Nations Foundation (UNF)  
UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  
United Nations Group of Governmental Experts (UN GGE)  
The Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA)  
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  
The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)  
World Economic Forum (WEF)  
 
  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
7 Executive Summary  
 
Towards Building A Global Digital Governance Architecture is a comprehensive roadmap for 
understanding existing initiatives that pertain to th e oversight of digital technologies with the 
goal of guiding future global governance. The report, both reflective and forward -looking, is 
rooted in a mapping of initiatives put forth by key sectors. These private sector, governmental, 
civil society and mu lti-stakeholder -led initiatives are presented for consideration when assessing 
the contemporary digital governance landscape. The mapping enables the articulation of the 
possible policy trajectories of future global digital governance. How have they evolve d, and how 
will they continue to evolve in a nebulous digital climate?  
 
While discussion of a Global Digital Compact is timely, catalysts like COVID -19 have made this 
conversation even more urgent than ever before. The pandemic forced the world to transit ion to 
digital technologies to not only continue with daily activities, but to ensure that the economy 
withstood the global crisis. The pre -existing need for access to virtual connectivity became even 
more critical. In 2022, as the world slowly transitions  to a hybrid environment, the digital realm 
will not recede, but will continue to be a larger part of our daily lives.  
 
From the analysis of these four sectoral initiatives, the following underlying trends were evident. 
The majority of the initiatives pro ved to be Western -centric, meaning the voices of Western 
countries dominated those of the Global South and other underrepresented groups, though 
China is becoming a key player on the world stage. Most initiatives are aspirational  at large 
with less enforce able verbiage in their mission statements and imposable rules to follow. 
Additionally, the majority of the initiatives follow a voluntary  compliance process and do not 
have mandatory procedures for follow -through. There is also a highly notable focus on 
increased digital accessibility,  since equitable digital practices are a global push within these 
initiatives to address areas in need of capacity building and digital resources. Finally, the 
sectors collectively pillar their initiatives around the recogniti on of digital rights as a human 
right . As the digital realm rapidly evolves, the infringements of human rights increase. It is 
essential that digital technologies are in accordance with human rights and compliant with 
existing human rights laws.  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
8 Addition ally, several graphs showcase these findings. Graph 1 reveals that there is a notable 
majority of multi -stakeholder initiatives among the four sectors covered. Graph 2 underlines that 
the majority of initiatives are focused on digital governance and policy making. Graph 3 shows a 
noticeable increase in the number of initiatives being established after 2008, and graph 4 shows 
a noteworthy growth of initiatives at the turn of the 20th century. Graph 5 examines the initiatives 
by their approval mechanism and accountability and notes most of the initiatives do not have a 
clear approval mechanism in place. Graph 6 reveals that most initiatives are aspirational rather 
than operational or e nforceable. Finally, graph 7 distinguishes the initiatives by the background 
of their founding members and  finds that a majority of the initiatives are Western -led. 
 
Given these trends, the report recommends the following next steps to better prepare for a n 
inclusive digital future:  
 
First , it is recommended that the Global South be given a more substantial voice at the 
discussion table to balance what is currently an outlook monopolized by the West. 
Representation from both local -level communities and mar ginalities –as well as the 
embracement of people -centered practices (indigenous peoples, gender, socioeconomic status, 
disabilities, race, and gender) –is critical to setting an inclusive agenda that encompass a wider 
range of fields, such as child protectio n and safety on the Internet. This inclusive approach 
would then require the establishment of shared responsibilities amongst other non -state actors 
including the private and public sectors.  
 
Second , we urge state and non -state actors to leverage their uni que characteristics, while 
taking into account both the wants and needs of their diverse communities. Each stakeholder is 
encouraged to hone in on the characteristics that distinguish them as leaders in the 
technological realm.  
 
Third , initiatives should b e practiced in a multilateral capacity to include smaller -scale 
mechanisms and promote shared global values, like human rights. There must be a concerted 
effort of, by, and for all stakeholders to monitor and evaluate data from developing countries to 
establish better digital policy and investments in digital technologies. The mapping provided in 
this report should not be a finality to the process and  needs to be updated regularly.  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
9 Fourth , there is a need to focus on mediating the levels of Internet fragm entation and 
unprotected data. As the world becomes more digitized, human rights must also become 
digitized to uphold society to accountability regarding content and criteria. All artificial 
intelligence systems must be regulated, and discriminatory and mi sleading content managed.  
 
Fifth , effective implementation of the initiatives must be a mutual priority as to not lose 
momentum and keep up with the nebulous nature of emerging technologies. In tandem, while 
respecting the delicate balance between access and security, and encouraging global, 
multilateral, multi -stakeholder cooperation for a common goal must remain at the forefront.  
 
Sixth , implementing Track 1.5 and 2 diplomacy practices will allow for multi -stakeholders to 
collaborate, build trust, and di scuss the ways in which to best address emerging digital 
technological strategies. This will also allow for a motivating environment that nudges the need 
to keep global digital technologies at the top of the UN’s agenda. The UN might also be the 
ideal impa rtial actor to push for more Track 1.5 and 2 dialogues amongst multi -stakeholder 
participants.  
 
Seventh , creating an interactive website to house the mapping of initiatives that is supervised 
by a neutral party (such as a university  or think tank) will allow for a more productive approach 
to maintaining and advancing the foundational mapping. This would als o increase accessibility 
and transparency for those looking to make use of the mapping.  
 
Eighth , it is highly recommended there be a successive practicum in joint partnership with 
NYU’s Center for Global Affairs, the United Nations Foundation, and an exper t, multi -
stakeholder panel to maintain progress in establishing a global digital governance architecture. 
The importance of this work as the UN strives to create a Global Digital Compact is both crucial 
and relevant.  
 
  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
10 Part 1: Introduction  
 
The digital la ndscape is as functional and fascinating as it is fickle. The perpetual creation of 
new technologies in a society engrossed in invention and competition comes with both 
beneficial impact and contemporary challenges. The Internet –a technology created to bri ng us 
together –has the potential to exist either as our greatest divider or as the most powerful conduit 
to connectedness. How sectors choose to collaborate will determine how effectively society is 
able to successfully promote digital technologies as a gl obal public good while balancing the 
security concerns they present.  
 
1.1: Evolution of Global Digital Governance: A Brief Background  
 
In 1963, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEE) established an initiative with 
the goal of fosteri ng technological innovation and excellence for the benefit of humanity. Five 
decades later, the landscape of digital technologies became ripe with variegated initiatives, but 
respective governance was falling short just as digital technologies were becomin g more central 
to nearly all aspects of life. 2018 served as a bumper year that saw the United Nations begin its 
work on digital cooperation, momentous progress in the European Union with the General Data 
Protection Regulation law, and –in general –the need for multilateral and multi -stakeholder 
cooperation in privacy, protection and access became evident.  
 
In July 2018, UN Secretary -General António Guterres recognized the imminent importance of 
sectoral cooperation, and appointed a High -Level Panel to asses s the economic impact of 
digital technologies –from social to ethical to legal –in order to leverage  their benefits and avoid  
their downfalls.1 The High -Level Panel called for cooperation and a global commitment to a safe 
and inclusive future, statin g that the report will “form part of the building blocks of an inclusive 
and interdependent digital world, with a fit -for-purpose new governance architecture .”2  
 
The Secretary -General followed up with the Roadmap for Digital Cooperation which presented a 
multi -year and multi -stakeholder action -oriented plan for tackling interconnectivity and security 
 
1 United Nations. (2019) The Age of Digital Interdependence - Report of the UN Secretary -General's 
High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation, pg 6.  
2 United Nations. (2019) The Age of Digital Interdependence - Report of the UN Secretary -General's 
High-level P anel on Digital Cooperation, pg 5.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
11 worldwide.3 Amongst its ambitions are achieving universal connectivity by 2030 by promoting 
digital public goods to unlock digital equity and establishing a framework for digital trust and 
security in alignment with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals. Subsequently, The Office 
of the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology was established to “coordinate the 
implementation of the Roadmap for Digital Cooperation and advance work towards the Global 
Digital Compact proposed in the Common Agenda, in close consultation with Member States, 
the technology industry, private companies, civil society, and other stakehol ders.”4 
 
To build upon the Panel’s consensus of accountability across borders as well as the Roadmap 
for Digital Cooperation , this report recommends cooperation and accountability across sectors 
in order to effectively execute a digital governance strateg y that addresses the delicate balance 
between security and access, as well as the impending challenges society faces as digital rights 
become more entwined with human rights.  
 
1.2: Objective: Support the Building of a Global Digital Governance Architecture  
 
In his recent Our Common Agenda  report the Secretary -General proposed a Global Digital 
Compact, building on his Roadmap for Digital Cooperation . He proposed that the Compact 
could outline shared principles across a number of areas, including “reaffirming the fundamental 
commitment to connecting the unconnected; avoiding fragmentation of the Internet; providing 
people with options as to how their data is used; application of human rights online; and 
promoting a trus tworthy Internet by introducing accountability criteria for discrimination and 
misleading content.”5 And beyond the UN’s efforts to create a Global Digital Compact, a 
resource on governance has proven to be a crucial necessity as the private sector, 
gover nments and civil society prioritize cooperation.  
 
To lay the foundation for future -oriented progress, the United Nations Foundation initiated a 
practicum with New York University’s Center for Global Affairs with the objective to advance the 
 
3 United Nations. (2020). Road map for digital cooperation: implementation of the  
recommendations of the High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation: Report of the Secretary -General 
(A/74/821). United Nations. https://dacces s-ods.un.org/tmp/9803106.18877411.html  
4 Office of the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology. https://www.un.org/techenvoy/.  
5 United Nations. (2021). Our Common Agenda: Report of the Secretary -General, pg 63.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
12 current and exi sting state of knowledge about sectoral, multilateral and multi -stakeholder digital 
technology governance initiatives.  
 
Leveraging research, insights and perspectives of expert consultants facilitated a focused 
mission. After narrowing in on the initiativ es spearheaded by three key actors –the private 
sector, governments, civil society and NGOs –an integrated analysis allowed for a 
comprehensive and inclusive look at the pros, cons and stakeholder priorities within existing 
digital governance initiatives. A mapping structure allowed for a clear comparative analysis 
across sectors, which further identified strengths and weaknesses, shedding light on gaps 
where new governance initiatives could proactively embark on setting new and necessary 
norms. It also made clear the need to add a fourth sector –multi -stakeholder –that takes into 
account the power of combining sectoral forces. In order to create an effective digital global 
governance framework, creators must take a judicious outlook in terms of what’s more 
impo rtant: cooperation or effectiveness. The reality is that while, ideally, digital rights as human 
rights imply alignment should exist across the sectors, responsible best practices agreed upon 
by multiple stakeholders may not render the same results as a si ngle-sector decree.  
 
1.3: The Contemporary Setting: The Time Is Now  
 
First came email, then file -sharing, and in 1989, the creation of the World Wide Web 
revolutionized what it means to be connected.6 It can be argued that this early progression of 
technological advancement was a foreshadowing of the steady evolution of technologies in our 
modern climate.  
 
As of 2021, Earth is home to at least 7.8 billion people, but “an estimated 37 percent of the 
world's population –or 2.9 billion people –have still n ever used the Internet.”7 But while the 
numbers convey that most of the world is online, a deeper dive shows the discrepancies as to 
where the majority of Internet users are based. An estimated 96 percent of those who have 
never used the Internet live in developing countries. Though Internet penetration grew more 
than 13 percent in the 46 UN -designated Least Developed Countries (LDCs), still, almost three 
 
6 Roser, Max, et al. “Internet.” Our World in Data, July 2015. ourworldindata.org, 
https://ourworldindata.org/internet.  
7 “Press Release.” International Telecommunication U nion, 30 Nov. 2021, 
https://www.itu.int:443/en/mediacentre/Pages/PR -2021 -11-29-FactsFigures.aspx.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
13 quarters of the population have never connected to the Internet. “Women in LDCs are 
particularly margi nalized, with roughly four out of every five still offline."8 
 
The UN Secretary -General's Envoy on Technology Office’s priorities are aligned with the 
Roadmap for Digital Cooperation key actions, including, but not limited to, affordability, equity 
and in clusivity when it comes to digital technology access for all. By 2030, the Office aspires to 
create universal and meaningful connectivity, pushing forward a shared goal set by the SDGs, 
the UN Secretary -General's Roadmap for Digital Cooperation , and the In ternational 
Telecommunication Union’s (ITU) Connect2030 Agenda. But while priorities are aligned, the 
path forward is not without obstacles. Compounded by the issues that affect both the developing 
world –like climate change and gender equality –and countrie s suffering economic disparities or 
living under an oppressive regime, it becomes evident that Internet governance is about access 
as much as it is about security. Moreover, in a contemporary setting where a range of societal 
and economic issues, both glob ally and regionally, are exacerbated by the permeation of digital 
technologies, tech exceptionalism –the concept that the world’s most complex social problems 
can be solved with technological solutions –is no longer enough.9 Internet governance can no 
longe r be siloed and must move toward a multi -stakeholder, multiplatform and multipurpose 
solution that reflects the ubiquity of digital technologies.  
 
  
 
8 “Press Release.” International Telecommunication Union, 30 Nov. 2021, 
https://www.itu.int:443/en/mediacentre/Pages/PR -2021 -11-29-FactsFigures.aspx.  
9 John E . Katsos and Jason Miklian. Overcoming Tech Exceptionalism: How to Improve Societal Impact 
by Technology Firms in Fragile and Conflict Settings. 9 Jan. 2019, globalpolicyjournal.com.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
14  
Part 2: Mapping & Methodology  
 
The analysis of this report builds upon a comprehensive mapping exercise of the existing 
private sector, governmental, civil society, and multi -stakeholder -led initiatives. This section 
provides the context of the mapping exercise, the criteria used to sel ect the initiatives, and what 
the mapping exercise reveals. The list of initiatives is included in the Appendix.  
 
2.1: Mapping Contemporary Global Governance Initiatives  
 
Given the broad and multilayered nature of the digital governance landscape as it exists today, 
mapping was a necessary exercise to identify key trends, as well as assess any existing gaps. 
Although this report includes many of the most recent, foundationa l digital governance 
initiatives, new initiatives are being created at a rapid pace to reflect the ever -changing digital 
environment. Hence, it is crucial to maintain an up -to-date list of the contemporary initiatives, as 
the developing nature of global di gital trends often dictate the direction these new initiatives 
take.  
 
The UN, and other civil -society and governmental organizations, have carried out similar 
mapping exercises in the past. A noteworthy example is the UN’s Mapping of International 
Interne t Public Policy Issues, a 2015 paper that describes over 600 initiatives.10 Although the 
UN’s paper serves as a useful tool in understanding the pre -2015 Internet policy landscape, the 
research and analysis carried out in this report differs significantly from any other publicly 
available resource. This report not only includes a comprehensive list of 99 contemporary 
initiatives that are easily searchable and digestible for the average reader who may not be 
familiar with the topic, but it also builds upon p resent -day trends that continuously influence the 
global digital governance landscape. The comprehensive list of the initiatives mapped can be 
found in the Appendix. Lastly, the UN refers to such digital projects and institutions as 
mechanisms . Although “m echanisms” is a useful term, the authors of this report use the term 
initiatives . 
 
 
10 “Mapping of International Internet Public Policy Issues.” UN Commission  on Science and Technology 
for Development, 2015. https://unctad.org/system/files/official -document/ecn162015crp2_en.pdf   
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
15 2.2: Determining Criteria: What Makes an Initiative?  
 
In an attempt to view the current digital global governance landscape with a wide –yet 
comprehensive –lens, the initiat ives outlined in this report were selected based on consistent 
criteria and have been studied through a set of standardized categories.  
 
The criteria requires that the initiatives have at least three members and/or signatories, hence 
be multilateral in na ture. The initiatives must be established by one or more of the following 
sectors: (i) private sector, (ii) government(s), (iii) civil society, (iv) multi -stakeholder. The four 
sectors are defined as follows: (i) private sector  includes for -profit companie s (eg. Microsoft) 
with national and/or global reach; (ii) government sector  encompasses three levels - federal, 
state/provincial, and municipal. Further, this includes all regional state -level agreements (eg. 
European Union) and the entire UN system (UN Se cretariat and all Agencies, Funds and 
Programmes); (iii) civil society  includes non -for-profit and non -governmental organizations, 
think tanks, and charitable foundations (eg.Charles Koch Institute, Hewlett Foundation); (iv) 
multi -stakeholder sector  includ es a combination of government, private sector, and civil 
society. While the majority of the multi -stakeholder initiatives include all three sectors, there are 
instances where only two of the three sectors are represented (eg. government -private, civil 
society-government, etc). For the purposes of this report, if there are two or more sectors 
present in an initiative, it is categorized as multi -stakeholder.  
 
Synchronically, the categories studied for each initiative, in addition to their title and date of 
establishment, include the following:  
 
● Mandate  refers to the mission of the initiative, as stated by its respective institution or 
membership. The mandate is an essential component as it provides a clear objective 
and justification for its creation.  
 
● Focus  Area  includes the key issues the initiative aims to address. Focus areas can 
range from privacy and cybersecurity to human rights and access. The focus area is 
typically outlined in the initiative’s mandate. Clearly identifying focus areas is necessary 
for a comprehensive analysis of key trends, therefore facilitating a roadmap for making 
recommendations for the future of the digital governance landscape.  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
16 ● Members  is the list of states, companies, or institutions who are signatory to or have 
declared supp ort for the initiative. It is important to note that advisors and individuals are 
not considered to be members for the purposes of this report. Members are a core 
component of assessing the initiative’s effectiveness, level of recognition, and degree of 
support.  
 
● Geographical Coverage  conveys the region of the world in which each initiative has 
purview over. The mapping adheres to the UN’s designated regional divisions, with 
selection options from: Global, Africa, Asia, North America, South America, Europe , 
Oceania. Incorporating geographical coverage gives insight into regional trends – and in 
this case, deficits – of digital governance initiatives.  
 
● Approval Mechanism  showcases the processes with which the institution approves new 
initiatives. For exampl e, if the OECD seeks to add a new phase to its Going Digital 
Project, the approval mechanism refers to the process the organization will use to 
approve this new initiative. Identifying the approval process is an essential component of 
measuring the effecti veness of the institution, as well as assessing the difficulties of 
making changes to the initiative. Approval mechanisms include  consensus, majority, 
signatory, veto, and no objection.  
 
● Accountability  refers to the initiative’s ability to enforce a decre e. Whereas some 
initiatives are highly enforceable due to their penalty structure, others are voluntary and 
therefore do not hold the power to obligate signatories to implement the initiatives. 
Selection options for this category include  operational (initi ative is operational but has an 
unclear nature of accountability), enforceable (initiative institutes penalties against 
violations), and aspirational (initiative is completely voluntary with no penalties against 
violators). Although this is the most subjec tive category in the mapping, identifying each 
initiative’s degree of accountability is necessary in understanding its durability.  
 
● Legacy  is the foundational documents and/or doctrines that were referenced or acted as 
inspiration in the creation of this i nitiative. For example, the European Union’s General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) highlights the European Convention on Human 
Rights (1950) and the European Data Protection Directive (1995) as historical backing 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
17 for its existence.11 Legacy is an important component of identifying key legislation that 
may have influenced the wider digital governance landscape.  
 
● Source  is the website link for each initiative. The source is included in the mapping for 
ease of access and future referenc e.  
 
● Gaps Identified  is a set of notes highlighting gaps in each initiative, as outlined by the 
authors. The identification of existing gaps enhances the analysis of key trends and 
recommendations provided in this report. These notes will further the conve rsation and 
research allowing others, like the UN, to expand upon and address persistent gaps in 
digital global governance.  
 
Although funding was discussed as a possible category, it is not included in the final mapping. 
Identifying and assessing the fundi ng sources for each initiative is a potential future research 
opportunity, as the findings may help differentiate successful initiatives from those that fail.  
 
2.3: What the Mapping Reveals  
 
Through the mapping process, it was possible to identify 99 in itiatives, in which the majority 
number (42 in total) were formed by multi -stakeholder.  
 
The following graphs provide the visualization of our findings12 by sector, focus area of 
initiatives, year and decade of creation, approval mechanism by the membersh ip, accountability 
of members, and background of founding members.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 “What is GDPR, the EU’s new data protection law?” General Data Protection Regulation. 
https://gdpr.eu/what -is-gdpr/  
12 The word "unclear" used in the graphs reflected the lack of info rmation regarding features on 
accountability and approval mechanisms through official websites and reports.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
18  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 1  
 
 
Graph 1 notes the number of initiatives per sector (Civil Society, Government, Private Sector 
and Multi -stakeholder). Among the four sectors mapped, multi -stakeholder initiatives are nearly 
double those of civil society and the government sector initiatives, while private sector initiatives 
are the fewest.  
 

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 2  
 
 
Graph 2 identifies the primary focus areas of the initiatives mapped. Over a third of all initiatives 
surveyed are focused on Digital Governance and Policymaking, while Child Protection and 
Transparency are the least focused on areas.  

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 3  
 
Graph 3 notes the number of initiatives established per year, starting with 1963. After 2008 a 
significant increase in the number of initiatives being established is discernible.  
 
 
 
 

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
21  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 4  
 
Graph 4 notes the number of initiatives by decade. It shows that while there were no new 
multilateral initiatives in  the 1970s and 1980s, there was a significant growth from the turn of the 
20th Century, with 2018 -19 being a bumper year.  
 
 
 
 

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
22  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 5  
 
 
 
 
The Graphs 5 records how the initiatives are approved by their membership, and reveals that 
most  of the initiatives do not have a clear approval mechanism, while only three are approved 
by majority.  
 
 
 

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
23  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 6  
 
Graph 6 records the objective of the initiatives towards their members, and reveals that most 
initiatives are aspirational in nature, while only eight are enforceable.  
 
 
 
 

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
24  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graph 7  
 
Graph 7 identifies whether the founding members of the initiatives have a Western or Non -
Western background. It clearly shows that until now an overwhelming majority of the initiatives 
are Western led .  
 
  

Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
25 Part 3: Sectoral Initiatives: Key Findings  
 
The mapping, as aforementioned, is divided into four primary categories: i) private sector, ii) 
government sector, iii) civil society/NGO, and iv) multi -stakeholder. The graphs as seen in Part 
2 begin to illuminate trends prevalent in the mapping.  This se ction builds upon the information 
within the graphs to provide an in -depth two -pronged analysis of all 99 initiatives.  
 
3.1: A Comprehensive Analysis: Decoding Sectoral Trends  
 
The first part of the analysis offers a breakdown of each individual sector’ s key findings, which 
encompass a wide range of trends. From provision of expertise exhibited across private sector 
initiatives to a focus on digital economy and trade in the government sector, trends are varied in 
scope and depth. The purpose of individua lized sector analysis is two -fold. First, it exists to both 
identify and highlight the unique prioritizations of each sector in regard to  digital governance (i.e. 
what topics dominate and appear most frequently). Second, it also offers a roadmap to navigat e 
the themes and areas of expertise that each stakeholder is uniquely positioned to provide in a 
potential multi -stakeholder collaboration.  
 
The second part of the sectoral analysis highlights the five key topics that are of priority across 
the board. In our consultations, there was a clear desire to understand the areas of digital 
governance that may be “quick wins.” Thus, the objective was to identify the shared 
characteristics between the various sectors’ respective global governance initiatives in an e ffort 
to improve the general understanding of overlapping topics and ideas.   
  
3.1.1 Private Sector  
  
● Multifaceted Cybersecurity:  “Strategic cyber security and stability”13 remains a constant 
and integral theme of industry -led digital governance initiativ es. Two years in a row, 
“cyber -attacks'' and “massive data fraud and threat” ranked among the top five global 
risks. More than 80 percent of the experts consulted in the World Economic Forum’s 
latest annual survey expected the risks of “cyber -attacks: thef t of data/money” and 
 
13 “What We Do”, Cyber Peace Institute, https://cyberpeaceinstitute.org/what -we-do 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
26 “cyber -attacks: disruption of operations and infrastructure” to increase yearly.14 The 
scope of threats is growing to encompass concepts of collective cyber defen se 
(Cybersecurity Tech Accord), terrorism mobilized through digital techn ologies (Global 
Internet Forum on Counter -Terrorism), to critical infrastructure protection (African 
Technology Policy Studies Network). That said, it is clear that private sector -led 
initiatives skew toward a larger membership base due to a “strength in n umbers” 
mentality. When more members subscribe to cyber security protocols, the network of 
protection increases to create a “robust cybersecurity ecosystem.”15 
  
● Provision of Expertise:  The privatization of the Internet and telecommunication industries 
fostered the role of private companies and the private sector as technical experts. 
Private companies are uniquely positioned to lend their expertise to advise and assist 
public officials on the maintenance and extension of a free and open Internet, to keep 
the “Internet as a place of limitless possibility.”16 There is a clear indication through the 
analysis of initiatives mandates that the private sector seeks to contribute their technical  
expertise to inform their respective governments on holistic digital governance, such as 
the Cybersecurity Coalition, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and 
Asia Internet Coalition. The emphasis on the protection of its consumers is  a central 
node of private sector initiatives. As identified in the UN High -Level Panel on Digital 
Cooperation, “…the role of the private sector in human rights is becoming increasingly 
pronounced. As digital technologies and digital services reach scale s o quickly, 
decisions taken by private companies are increasingly affecting millions of people across 
national borders.”17 Thus, data protection, privacy standards, and protection of children 
online are of particular concern for the private sector. The righ ts of children require acute 
attention. Children go online at ever younger ages, and children under the age of 18 
make up one -third of all Internet users.18   
  
 
14 “Global Findex Database 2017”, The World Bank, https://globalfin dex.worldbank.org  
15 “Mission”, The Cybersecurity Coalition, https://www.cybersecuritycoalition.org/  
16 “About”, InternetWorks, https://www.theinternet.works/about -2/ 
17 United Nations. (2019) The Age of Digital Interdependence - Report of the UN Secretary -General's 
High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation.  
18 “The State of the World's Children 2017: Children in a Digital World”, UNICEF, 
https://www.unicef.org/media/48601/file  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
27 ● Inherently Global:  The global permutation of companies, such as Microsoft, Google, 
Snapchat, Me ta, and TikTok, has altered the regional implications of governance 
initiatives. Due to the inherently global nature of these companies, their adoption of 
governance principles has wider implications than the region in which their companies 
are headquarter ed. In particular, the prevalence of tech giants, such as Google, 
Microsoft, and Meta, as leaders in a wide variety of governance initiatives lends itself as 
an incentive for smaller companies to join.  
  
● Western -Centrism:  Private sector initiatives often s eek to influence and inform future 
national legislation and policy creation. A prevalent trend is that much of the foundational 
legislation and policies originates in Western countries, more specifically: the United 
States and the European Union. Internet Works , a freedom of speech online initiative, 
anchors its mandate to Title 47, Section 230 of the United State Code enacted as a part 
of the United States Communications Decency Act.19 Similarly, The Consumer 
Technology Association  is global in scope with 1500 members but seeks to “educate 
U.S. policymakers to ensure the innovation economy is protected from laws and 
regulations that delay, restrict or ban the development of technologies in all sectors.”20 
The emphasis on the U.S. or  European based legal structures has implications on the 
formulation and activity of both Western -based companies and smaller companies 
seeking to adopt interoperable business models.  
 
3.1.2 Government  
  
● Cybersecurity/Cybercrime:  Cybersecurity and cyber crime are key issues identified in 
government -led digital governance initiatives. In contrast to the private sector’s viewpoint 
on the topic, the emphasis from governments is the creation of hard law. The General 
Data Protection Regulation  (GDPR) was imple mented by the European Union (EU) in 
2018. Since then, it’s become known as the “toughest privacy and security law” on 
data.21 Government sector cybersecurity initiatives tackle a wide breadth of topics. The 
impact of cyber incidents to disrupt or destroy critical infrastructure, as seen in Stuxnet, 
has placed critical infrastructure protection at the forefront. Finally, artificial intelligence 
 
19  InternetWorks, https://w ww.theinternet.works/about -2 
20 The Consumer Technology Association, https://www.cta.tech/who -we-are 
21 “What is GDPR”, The General Data Protection Regulation, https://gdpr.eu/what -is-gdpr/  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
28 (AI) is a central node that is widely identified to be harnessed as a tool for good, but also 
the inherent risk pr evalent therein. The public sector –and, in particular, the UN – is more 
likely to achieve noteworthy memberships from participants. However, as the 
membership list grows, the more aspirational the missions become. This is because any 
decree that is enforcea ble may become invasive to a member's sovereignty. Regardless 
of how aspirational the government sector missions become, upholding accountability 
within the government sector involving cyber security and cybercrime remains a 
challenge. Therefore, the gover nment sector may aspire to have more concrete and 
enforceable missions to ensure equitable digital practices.  
 
● Digital Economy and Trade:  The digital economy presents a new challenge surrounding 
taxation/tariffs, trade, and consumer protections. The develo pment of an inclusive digital 
economy requires comprehensive strategies, national frameworks, and international 
agreements. According to the World Bank’s Global Findex 2017 report, 69 percent of 
adults have an account with a financial institution (up by se ven percentage points since 
2014).22 Thus, over half a billion adults gained access to digital financial instruments in 
three years. Still, much of the population is left behind in this new form of digital 
economy, which remains central to this cluster of digital governance initiatives. An 
initiative seeking to bolster the ease of digital trade is The Digital Economy Partnership 
Agreement (DEPA). DEPA, established in 2020, “...is a first of its kind agreement that 
establishes new approaches and collaboratio ns in digital trade issues…”23  
 
● Societal Digital Transformation Strategy:  A key commonality in government -led digital 
governance initiatives is the emphasis on a comprehensive “digital transformation” 
strategy. This includes not only the positive implicat ions of digital transformation on 
society, but the inherent risks associated with it. Interestingly, these society -wide digital 
transformation strategies are tackled by a variety of government actors. It ranges from 
the G20 Smart Cities Alliances, to The O CED Going Digital , to The African Digital 
Transformation Strategy.  The emphasis on digital transformation can be seen in the  
OCED Going Digital mandate where, “Since 2017, the project has supported policy 
makers in the quest to better understand digital tr ansformation and the effects of digital 
 
22 “Global Findex Database 2017”, The World Bank, https://globalfindex.worldbank.org  
23 The Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA), https://www.mti.gov.sg/Improving -Trade/Digital -
Economy -Agreements/The -Digital -Economy -Partnership -Agreement  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
29 technologies on our economies and societies, in an effort to shape a positive digital 
future.”24 More broadly, there is an observable trend that identifies the goal of “building 
back better”25 by using digital technologies steeped in democratic principles and values.  
   
● Great Variability in Spectrum of Mandate and Accountability Structure:  Where civil 
society and the private sector appear more targeted toward a single specified challenge, 
the government sector seeks to have comprehensive mandates. It could pertain to child 
protection, online infrastructure issues, and cybersecurity. Future iterations of this report 
may find it useful to dig deeper into the intentional ways in which mandates are worded, 
as well as the trends and patterns that come from having either a comprehensive 
mandate or a broad, non -specific mandate. In terms of account ability, the government 
sector possesses the widest range of measures. As will be discussed further, many 
initiatives are voluntary and aspirational, meaning there is no way to enforce adherence. 
Although, through a variety of state structures, penalties c an be administered. For 
example, the GDPR  has a two -tier penalty system. A lower tier of €10 million or for more 
serious violations of a maximum of €20 million.26  
 
3.1.3 Civil Society  
 
● Greater Leniency Towards Implementation Strategies:  The great major ity of non -
governmental organizations and think tanks focus on research and academia, as well as 
establishing good practices, monitoring and evaluation of digital technologies capacities 
with governments, multi -stakeholder and private sector. As a result, civil society 
initiatives tend to provide solutions and policy analysis recommendations rather than 
setting norms in the international arena.  
  
● Financial Dominance by Western Countries:  When it comes to the global nature of the 
Internet and digital interde pendence, civil society initiatives followed suit. Many focus 
their attention on global efforts to increase both local and regional governance initiatives. 
A noteworthy finding is that though mandates are equipped with global aspirations, 
 
24 The OECD Going Digital, https://www .oecd.org/digital/going -digital -project/  
25 “2021 G7 Digital and Technology Ministerial Declaration” G7 Digital and Technology Ministers, 
http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/ict/2021 -digital -tech-declaration.html  
26 “What is GDPR, the EU’s New Data Protection Law”, GD PR, https://gdpr.eu/what -is-gdpr/  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
30 Western companies , foundations and charities tend to be the financial supporters, 
partners or members of NGOs and think tanks. Financial support can promote the 
advancement of digital cooperation within the Global South, but it can also be 
counterintuitive to development, as the agenda setting may address different interests in 
the region.  
 
● Awareness Spreading Through Advocacy:  Civil society acts through soft -law initiatives to 
promote a better understanding of technology and the respective responsibilities for 
states, mult i-stakeholder, and private entities. The goal of these efforts are mainly to 
spread awareness and advocate central issues that surround digital governance via 
informative documents, such as white papers. Even if governance is a strategy to 
facilitate advoc acy, the large fragmentation of initiatives –in addition to the amount of 
production of documents –can be counterproductive. As discussed in the UN Secretary 
General's High -Level Panel for Digital Cooperation report, governance in the context of 
the overlap of numerous global initiatives had become "complex, but not necessarily 
effective."27  
 
● Education, Training and Research:  An important actor in the civil society sector is 
academia, often participating through the establishment of think tanks. The role and  
impact of academia in civil society has resulted in emphasis on digital education, training 
and research. Here, education and training follow two patterns: First, the use of digital 
technologies to provide education and training, utilizing its inherently connective nature 
to overcome educational barriers. Second, the need to increase education and training 
for digital literacy remains a priority for civil society actors. For example, the Internet 
Society, as a part of an overarching mandate, “...supports e ducation in developing 
countries specifically, and wherever the need exists” and “...promotes professional 
development and builds community to foster participation.”28 The research component of 
academia has led to the development of databases as well as th e desire to produce 
repositories of knowledge to be used by decision makers. The latter also works to 
enable evidence -based informed decisions. For example, George Washington 
University’s Digital Trade and Data Governance Hub  aims “…to provide policymakers , 
 
27 United Nations. (2019). "UN Secretary General's High -level Panel for Digital Cooperation". p. 23.  
28 Internet Society, https://www.internetsociety.org/mission/  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
31 the press, and the public with a greater understanding of these complex digital trade and 
data governance issues in order to improve trust and efficiency in our systems.”29 
 
3.1.4 Multi -stakeholder  
  
● Cyber Capacity Building:  Multi -stakeholderism provid es a unique nexus between the 
private sector, government, and civil society -led initiatives. Each sector comes equipped 
with a unique set of skills, as well as a unique purview into various priorities in which to 
build cyber capacity. According to the UN G roup of Governmental Experts (UN GGE) 
2015 Report, cyber capacity building encompasses the following three features: i) a 
means to secure the cyber ecosystem directly (i.e. through technical means or policies), 
ii) a means to action or realize cyber norms and confidence building measures, iii) a 
means to enable participation in cybersecurity discussions.30 Cyber capacity building 
often results in a forum/discussion medium to address gaps and weaknesses in 
particular areas of digital knowledge. These forums are often spearheaded by the private 
sector, who possess the technical skills required, such as encryption or cyber awareness 
strategies.  
 
● Global Standardization as a Necessity:  As multi -stakeholder initiatives involve a diverse 
group of participants, there is a trend on the importance of global standardization to 
achieve interoperability. This includes technical standards such as the Domain Name 
System (DNS) stewarded by the Int ernet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
(ICANN). Digital participation among the private sector, governments and civil society 
seeks to improve transparency and quality in the development of all digital technologies 
and its operational counterpart s. While many best practices and standards exist, they 
often address only narrow parts of a vast and diverse universe that ranges from talking 
toys to industrial control systems.  As digital technologies and the Internet continue to 
become an immutable par t of everyday life, there must be an undertaking to ensure all 
present and future technological developments are unified in a global technical standard.  
 
 
29 The Digital Trade and Data Governance Hub, https://datagovhub.elliott.gwu.edu/about/  
30 “2015: Report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Development in the Field of Information and 
Telecom munications in the Context of International Security”, UN Group of Governmental Experts, 
https://documents -dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N15/228/35/PDF/N1522835.pdf?OpenElement  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
32 ● Digital Rights as Human Rights:  Digital rights –also referred to as human rights online –is 
a core tena nt throughout the multi -stakeholder initiatives. Notably, the multi -stakeholder 
approach allows for multiple lenses in which to look at digital rights (as opposed to solely 
through the consumer/customer perspective in the private sector). For example, the 
Internet & Jurisdiction Policy Network seeks to develop standards and solutions to 
“pressing legal challenges at the intersection of the global digital economy, human 
rights, and security,”31 whereas the African Declaration on Internet Rights & Freedoms  
seeks to uphold and promote human rights online through the specific context of multi -
stakeholder social and economic development in Africa.32 The variability and diversity of 
multi -stakeholder initiatives allows for unique perspectives, and thus, approaches  to the 
realization of digital rights.  
 
● Diverse in Focus and Scope, Accompanied by Targeted Goals:  Multi -stakeholder 
initiatives have a robust and diverse membership roster due to the inherent variability of 
stakeholders. The mandates and objectives for mu lti-stakeholder initiatives were able to 
expand into less -traditional digital governance foci. While not diminishing from specificity 
and targeted goals, greater diversity in mission statements and mandate focus was more 
evident compared to that of the pri vate, government and civil society sectors. For 
example, the Open Smart Register Platform (Open SRP), focusing on the healthcare 
industry, calls on “data -driven decision making within the health care system, however, it 
is an open -source, mobile -first plat form, built to enable data -driven decision making at all 
levels of the health system. It was designed to address the problem with existing 
technology solutions that are fragmented, unscalable, functionally limited, and not 
interoperable with national -level information systems .”33   
 
3.2 Overarching Trends Across All Sectors  
 
Each sector –private, government, civil society, and multi -stakeholder –presents a unique and 
valuable offering of digital governance prioritization and perspective. Still, within the diverse 
mandates and objectives of separate sectors, governance initiative s demonstrate pervasive 
trends. The commonalities found therein are as follows: i) Western -centrism, ii) aspirational, not 
 
31 The Internet & Jurisdiction Policy Network, https://www.internetjurisdiction.ne t/about/mission  
32 The African Declaration on Internet Rights and Freedoms, https://africaninternetrights.org/en/about  
33 Open Smart Register Platform (Open SRP) https://smartregister.org/about/   
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
33 enforceable, iii) continuation of voluntary agreement, iv) increased focus on digital accessibility, 
and v) promotion of digital righ ts.    
 
● Western -Centrism:  Through the analysis of all initiatives, it is observable that the United 
States and Europe are the major protagonists in global digital governance. These 
countries, defined herein as “Western,” are often responsible for setting n orms, leading 
the initiatives, and operationalizing new parameters worldwide. There is a clear 
discrepancy in leadership opportunities for and participation of developing countries that 
are engaged in the international arena.  
 
While this report addresses the Western -centrism –primarily with the US and EU acting 
as thought leaders and key enforcers of global digital governance policies –it should be 
noted that China is a key player in the global digital governance landscape. Since 2015, 
the country has been i mplementing Made in China 2025, a national strategy to secure a 
"position in the global powerhouse in high -tech industries" by reducing the dependence 
on technology from the West and investing in its own innovation mechanisms with the 
goal to increase the competitiveness of Chinese companies by 2025.34 Additionally, in 
2014, China launched (and still hosts) the World Internet Conference, a state -funded 
event that attracts global tech leaders such as from Apple to participate in discussions 
about global digi tal governance policies. In 2019, 600 companies participated.35  
 
● Aspirational, Not Enforceable:  The majority of initiatives –53 out of 99 –are aspirational. 
Still, there is a clear goal of transcending the collective information sharing and the use 
of volun tary international forums. The unified objective is to find an actionable digital 
governance structure to hold all participants accountable. A positive finding, this trend 
sees that governments in particular are also becoming less willing to accept a lenie nt 
regulatory approach. As discussed in the UN High -Level Panel for Digital Cooperation, 
 
34 "China Innovation Project: A Guide to Understanding China's Next Wave of Innovation". Harvard 
University Newsletter.  https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/innovation/made -china -2025 -explained   
35 Yujie Xue  and Minghe Hu . "China’s s tate-run World Internet Conference sees ‘quietest’ year ever amid 
coronavirus pandemic". South Morning China Post . Nov 24, 2020. 
https://www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3111154/chinas -state -run-world -internet -conference -sees -
quietest -year-ever-amid   
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
34 for example, in the United Kingdom, legislators are exploring how existing legal 
principles, such as "duty of care" could be applied to social media firms.36 
 
● Continua tion of Voluntary Agreement:  The aspirational nature of the majority of initiatives 
can likely be attributed to the overarching voluntary nature of most regional and/or 
international agreements. This signatory tendency is not unique solely to digital 
gover nance, but rather is a much larger conversation about international law and 
accountability. With the increasing omnipresence of digital technologies, the challenge 
will increasingly surround the incorporation of actors who do not freely subscribe to the 
proposed principles, values and standards.  
 
● Increased Focus on Digital Accessibility:  Positively noted, it is a universal feature across 
all sector initiatives as to the importance of increasing and promoting digital accessibility.  
As Tim Berners -Lee, Director of World Wide Web Consortium and inventor of the World 
Wide Web once stated, “T he power of the Web is in its universality. Access by everyone 
regardless of disability is an essential aspect.”37 Accessibility –or lack thereof –may take 
many forms, albeit through physical disability and unadaptable technology, or through 
the lack of tech nology or Internet infrastructure. Thus, it is important to remain cognizant 
of the variability of causes surrounding inaccessibility.  
 
● Digital Rights as Human Rights:  Many of the documents that codify human rights were 
written well before the digital age.  This includes the Universal Declaration on Human 
Rights; the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the Convention on the Elimination of 
all Forms of Discrimination agai nst Women; and the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child. That said, in many cases, it is not clear how human rights laws and treaties 
implemented in the pre -digital era should be applied in the digital age. There is an urgent 
need, as demonstrated in many  of the mission statements of digital governance 
initiatives, to examine how human rights frameworks and conventions should pilot digital 
cooperation and technology.  The discussion largely surrounds uncertainty of 
 
36 United Nations. (2019). The Age of Digital Interdependence: Report of the UN  
Secretary -General’s High -level Panel on D igital Cooperation.  
37 “Accessibility”, World Wide Web Consortium, 
https://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/Drafts/4betaW3org/accessibility -new-w3c200908131a  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
35 establishing a new human rights framework  targeting digital technologies or  finding the 
appropriate way in which to extend pre -existing human rights into the digital space.  This 
is a new frontier of human rights application that requires inclusive multi -stakeholder 
participation to identify the norms and shared values to be applied to digital 
technologies, including issues like privacy, freedom of speech and security.  
 
  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
36 Part 4: Next Steps: Preparing for an Inclusive Digital Future  
 
Based on an analysis of the sectoral initiatives, and the key f indings noted in the previous 
section, this section proposes a series of recommendations to facilitate pathway s to prepare for 
a more cooperative and inclusive digital future.  
 
4.1 An Inclusive Approach to Norm -Setting  
 
The US and EU maintain a primary leadership role in the digital technologies field, thus 
perpetuating a Western -centric approach to norm -setting. Within this approach, China’s World 
Internet Conference notwithstanding, the visibility of Global South led initiatives can be 
undermined and d eemed irrelevant. Historically, this is due to the power, and investment 
imbalance in non -Western states relative to that in Western states.   Regional arrangements in 
non-Western areas, especially through civil society organizations, have been protagonist s in 
addressing the challenges and fast -paced nature of digital technologies.38 For example, over the 
last ten years, Brazilian think tank Instituto Igarapé shaped new approaches on how 
governments can use digital technologies, as it “developed new technol ogies used by 
governments such as CopCast, a body -worn camera tested in Brazil, South Africa and the US. 
Other tools include the CrimeRadar, the ISPGeo and the Paraty Violence Prevention 
Observatory. Instituto Igarapé is also involved in developing a range  of innovative civic apps to 
support marginalized communities, including the Child Security Index and OKA.39 
 
On a micro -level, the discussion of a Western -centric approach also needs to address the 
marginalization of certain groups of people in the process of overcoming the digital divide. The 
consultation with local level and marginalized communities is essentia l to provide universal 
accessibility, truly inclusive collaboration, with human rights at the center.  
 
Recommendations  
 
 
38  "New Technologies". Igarapé Institute. https://i garape.org.br/en/congrats -igarape/   
39 OKA is "a Compass of Public Services is an Android and iOS mobile phone app for migrants, refugees 
and asylum seekers, as well as internally displaced persons in Brazil". https://igarape.org.br/en/oka/   
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
37 ● To improve participation and inclusion from the Global South and to put forth their own 
initiatives to the forefront of the discussio n, it is recommended that South America, 
Africa, Middle East, and Asia initiatives be able to participate equally in the global digital 
governance discussions. In other words, we recommend improving participation in global 
digital technologies through faci litating discussions with the Global South to enhance 
regional initiatives and bring them to the decision -making process. This can also be 
possible through local and regional grass -roots organizations. In this way, it is possible 
to understand the nuances of each region and how a Western -centric approach may not 
fulfill the needs when it comes to rights, trends, and accessibility.  
● On a micro -level, the inclusive approach should be accompanied by group 
representation from marginalized communities (women, LGB TQ+ people, indigenous 
peoples, people with disabilities) when working through discussions with the wider global 
leaders. It is proposed that this effort would enforce inclusivity amongst stakeholders 
when discussing the implementation of sensitive issues revolving around digital 
technologies.  
 
4.2 Where Digital Rights Meet National Responsibilities  
 
The conversation regarding digital rights is more timely, and important, than ever before. From 
freedom of expression to access to the Internet, digital rights encompasses various levels of 
digital responsibilities for states. The debate is not homogenous and often follows national 
regulations. However, globalization enabled the debate to transcend countries' geographical 
borders. Finding commonalities are necessary to promote a minimum set of digital 
responsibilities for all the countries, such as child pr otection protocols for Internet  use. The 
commonalities will be important to open the states' debate on how digital technologies can 
affect future generations.  
 
In our consultations, as "digital technologies increasingly cut across areas in which policies a re 
shaped by separate institutions,"40 the discussions about digital rights cannot fall under the 
premise of tech exceptionalism, or tech fragmentation. The Internet  is interconnected with all the 
other sectors, so the states should address the connectivit y, and openness of digital 
technologies in the discussions as a common topic transcending different fields.    
 
40 United Nations. (2019). "UN Secretary General's High -level Panel for Digital Cooperation". p. 23.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
38  
Recommendations:  
 
● Observed throughout our research was the askew application of human rights in the 
digital space. As aforementioned, the major ity of human rights declarations and treaties 
were established in a pre -digital era. Therefore, it is recommended that a full survey of 
human rights declarations and treaties be conducted to gain a greater understanding of 
the true applicability of human r ights in the post -COVID -19 digital era. The private 
sector, governments, and civil society should be actively involved leveraging their unique 
expertise and perspective on how to apply existing human rights instruments to ensure 
full realization of digital  rights.  
● To ensure long term sustainability for human rights, it is proposed that there be a global 
standard that is agreed upon by all states. This would supersede states’ private 
regulations and laws. With this base global standard, future generations a re protected 
from the vast changes and implementations of the Internet. This would also challenge 
the fact that technology evolves and changes on a daily basis, as the global standard 
would not be affected.  
 
4.3 A Case for Multi -stakeholderism as a Priori ty to Effectiveness  
  
Meaningful digital cooperation requires that multi -stakeholderism, despite its challenges, be 
implemented and strengthened. Given the wide spectrum of issues, each stakeholder will be 
required to leverage their unique position in digi tal governance; some initiatives may be led by 
the private sector or civil society rather than government or international organizations.  A multi -
stakeholder digital governance approach should seek to increase interaction and coordination 
between the publ ic sector and private entities to help mold approaches to economic, cultural 
and geographic contexts. Further, as identified in The Report of the Secretary -General , 
Roadmap for Digital Cooperation , special considerations must be taken, given that “...globa l 
discussions and processes are often not inclusive enough. This situation is exacerbated by the 
lack of a common entry point into the global digital architecture, which makes it especially hard 
for developing countries, small and medium -sized enterprises,  marginalized groups and other 
stakeholders with limited budgets and expertise to make their voices heard.”41  This must be 
 
41 United Nations. (2020). Report of the Secretary -General: Road map for digital cooperation.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
39 considered and acted on to increase the validity and effectiveness of true multi -stakeholder 
participation.  
The UN is a custodian of  global peace and security, human rights and development in the 21st 
century. The collaborative nature of the UN uniquely positions the organization to highlight 
issues emerging in the digital age. In the consultations that supported this research, concerns 
about the UN’s state -centric structure were addressed. The UN has begun to engage the private 
sector and tech community much more directly. Here, it is important to highlight the  
establishment of Microsoft’s UN Affairs Office, which seeks to “ deepen our [Microsoft’s] 
support for the UN's mission and work by advancing gl obal multi -stakeholder  action on key 
technology, environmental, humanitarian, development, and security goals, as well as by 
helping advance the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) .”42 However, working with 
stakeholders, such as the private sector and civil society, is still not an inherent feature of the 
UN.  Therefore, more should be done to promote effective and consistent multi -stakeholder 
participation.  
The UN retains a unique role and convening power to bring stakeholders together to continue 
mean ingful discussions on global digital governance. As identified in the High -Level Panel on 
Digital Cooperation, the UN has the opportunity to i) be a convener, ii) provide space for 
debating values and norms, iii) standard -setting, iv) multi -stakeholder or bilateral initiatives on 
specific issues, v) develop the capacity of member states, vi) ranking, mapping and measuring, 
vii) arbitration and dispute resolution.  
Recommendations:  
● The UN could initiate, possibly with academic or private -sector partners, Trac k 1.5 and 
Track 2 meetings with all relevant stakeholders. These meetings should target a 
consensus of principles and values in preparation for the Summit of the Future and the 
subsequent Global Digital Compact.  
● In our consultations, a universal uncertainty arose surrounding the role of each 
stakeholder in the multi -stakeholder approach. Therefore, we recommend for there to be 
additional Track 1.5 meetings to bring forward the leaders in the private sector, 
 
42 “Microsoft at the UN” Microsoft Office of UN Affairs, https://www.microsoft.com/en -us/united -nations  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
40 govern ment, and civil society to begin discussions surrounding the equitable 
implementation of a multi -stakeholder approach to global digital governance.    
4.4 Further Research via a Subsequent Practicum  
Considering the ubiquitous nature of digital in the futur e, further research is needed. First, the 
mapping in this report considered initiatives established until April 2022. As a natural 
consequence of the rapid development of emerging technologies, it is very likely that new 
initiatives will emerge to cope wit h and combat possible consequences of innovation.  
Second, the initiatives analyzed are focused at a multilateral scale, in which only initiatives with 
three or more governments, private sector, and civil society actors were considered. Even if the 
common trend relates to global approach, local and national initiatives may be positively 
impacting the accessibility of digital technologies and promotion of human rights.  
Third, there is no official data or evidence on the number of initiatives established wor ldwide. 
The lack of reliable data can reflect on assumptions on digital policy and global economy 
investments in digital technologies, affecting analysis -trend, and initiatives responses. 
Moreover, it also affects more heavily developing countries, as a re flection of low capacity and 
investments to map and collect data.  
Recommendations:  
● To increase productivity and accessibility, it is recommended to build an interactive 
website, possibly at a university or think -tank, to house the mapping. Here, the mappin g 
may be easily updated that translates directly to a user interface that is easy to use for 
all. An example of a potential outcome can be found in the  Digital Trade & Data 
Governance Hub.  
● Finally, we strongly recommend a subsequent practicum that can pick  up the proverbial 
baton and move towards an expansion of global digital governance initiatives, conduct 
further analysis, evaluate the effectiveness of initiatives and ultimately stay abreast of 
the developments of the Global Digital Compact.  
 
  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
41 Part 5: Conclusion  
 
Digital technologies are an increasingly inextricable feature of contemporary society. The 
connectivity it provides has boundless potential to fuel positive change, but –in contrast –it also 
maintains the potential to exacerbate existing fault li nes and worsen economic and other 
inequalities (as seen through the digital divide). On the eve of the COVID -19 pandemic, close to 
87 percent of individuals in developed countries used the Internet, compared with only 19 
percent in the least developed coun tries.43 Accessibility to digital technologies, reliable Internet, 
and coherent digital governance policies proved to be a defining feature of the COVID -19 
pandemic survival and recovery. What was unveiled during the COVID -19 pandemic was the 
irrefutable n eed for a comprehensive, equitable, universal digital access, connectivity, as well as 
stable governance to bring the remaining 2.9 billion people online.44 Today, online violations can 
lead to real -world violations; the Internet cannot continue as an ungo verned or detrimentally 
fragmented  space. It must embody an inclusive multi -stakeholder approach to governance in 
order to keep up with the rapid evolution of emerging technologies.  
 
The dynamic nature of digital technologies has proven to be a challenge for the global 
community, including national governments, private entities, and civil society. The speed and 
scale of change of emerging technologies is only increasing. Therefore, the swiftness, 
responsiveness and scope of digital global governance must i mprove to meet the moment. 
More fruitful forms of cooperation, collaboration and discussion are required to ensure that 
digital governance becomes an effective, implementable feature of the digital age. Most 
pressingly, those who advise on the future of gl obal digital governance must take into account 
the reality that digital rights are intertwined with human rights. In a digital -first era, global digital 
governance must lead with the knowledge that technologies are created for universal 
connectedness. It i s our hope that the approach to its governance encompasses shared values 
and principles rooted in egalitarianism to ensure an equitable digital future for all.   
 
43 International Telecommunications Unions (ITU), Measuring D igital Development. Facts and figures 
2019 (Geneva, 2019).  
44 United Nations. “Achieving Universal Meaningful Digital Connectivity: Setting a Baseline and Targets 
for 2030. United Nations Office of the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology and Intenationa l 
Telecommunications Union. https://www.itu.int/itu -d/meetings/statistics/wp -
content/u ploads/sites/8/2022/04/UniversalMeaningfulDigitalConnectivityTargets2030_BackgroundPaper.p
df 
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
42  
Appendix: List of Initiatives  
 
Private Sector -Led Initiatives (TOTAL: 10)  
 
1. Initiative Name:  Digital Services Coalition  
○ Date Established: 2019  
○ Mandate: To bring innovation and agility to government IT contracting. By 
working together, we can accelerate the government’s ability to implement 
services that focus on good usability, reliable technology, and accessibility for 
all—while also benefiting the individuals and firms that are part of the community.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Cooperation and Tech Innovation  
○ Members: 28 members including Agilesix, All Women Leadership, and 
Wheelhouse Group  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Majority  
○ Accountability: Unclear  
○ Legacy: Digital Services Playbook  
○ Source:  https://digitalservicescoalition.org/#/  
○ Gaps Identified: Private expertise to assist Public sector efficiency  
○ Note s: N/A 
 
2. Initiative Name: CyberSecurity Tech Accord  
○ Date Established: 2018  
○ Mandate:  To promote a safer online world by fostering collaboration among 
global technology companies committed to protecting their customers and users 
and helping them defend agains t malicious threats. By combining the resources 
and expertise of the global technology industry, the Cybersecurity Tech Accord 
creates a starting point for dialogue, discovery and decisive action.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity  
○ Members: 150 members including De ll, Meta, and Microsoft  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Signatory  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
43 ○ Accountability: Unclear  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://cybertechaccord.org/  
○ Gaps Identified:  Lack of coordination  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
3. Initiative Name: Global Internet Forum to Counter Terrorism (GIFCT)  
○ Date Established: 2017  
○ Mandate:  To prevent terrorists and violent extremists from exploiting digital 
platforms. Founded by Facebook, Microsoft, Twitter, and YouTube in 2017, the 
Forum was established to foster technical collaboration among member 
companies, advance relevant research, an d share knowledge with smaller 
platforms.  
○ Focus Area:  Cybersecurity  
○ Members: 18 Members including Zoom, Airbnb, and Amazon  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: Christchurch Call to Action & UN Gu iding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights  
○ Source:  https://gifct.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
4. Initiative Name: CyberSecurity Coalition  
○ Date Established:  2016  
○ Mandate:  To bring together leading companies to help policymakers develop 
consensus -driven policy solutions that: Promote a vibrant and robust 
cybersecurity ecosystem, support the development and adoption of cybersecurity 
innovations, and encourage organizations of all sizes to take steps to improve 
their cybersecurity.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersec urity 
○ Members: 21 Members including Google, Microsoft, and Microsoft  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
44 ○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: NIST  
○ Source: https://www.cybersecuritycoalition.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The CyberSecurity Coalition bridges the gap between 
technology companies’  expertise and policymakers.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
5. Initiative Name: Consumer Technology Association  
○ Date Established: 2015  
○ Mandate: To ensure the innovation economy is protected from laws and 
regulations that delay, restrict, or ban the development of technologies in all our 
sectors.  
○ Focus Area: Tech Innovation and Policy Making  
○ Members: 1500 Members including Alibaba Group, Google, and Logitech  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanis m: Signatory  
○ Accountability:  Enforceable  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.cta.tech/  
○ Gaps Identified: Advocating for tech companies to influence legislation  
○ Notes: Members must pay membership fees.  
 
6. Initiative Name: ICT Coalition for Children Online  
○ Date Established: 2012  
○ Mandate:  To help younger internet users across Europe to make the most of the 
online world and deal with any potential challenges and risks. With the internet 
now one of the most important sources of information, education and 
entertainme nt for many people, it is vital that industry, government, schools and 
other relevant organizations work together to help children and young people use 
the internet in a safe and responsible way.  
○ Focus Area: Child Safety  
○ Members: 14 Members including Disne y, T-Mobile, Google, and TikTok  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
45 ○ Approval Mechanism:  Signatory   
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: The Principles for the Safer Use of Connected Devices and Online 
Services by Children and Young People in the EU  
○ Source: https://www.ictcoalition.eu/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
7. Initiative Name: Asia Internet Coalition  
○ Date Established: 2010  
○ Mandate: To promote the understanding and resolution of Internet policy issues 
in the Asia Pacific region. Asia Internet Coalition’s mission is to represent the 
Internet industry and participate and promote stakeholder dialogue between the 
public and private sectors, sharing best practices and ideas on Internet 
technology and the digita l economy.  
○ Focus Area: Policy Making and Digital Cooperation  
○ Members:  17 Members including Google, Apple and Twitter  
○ Geographical Coverage: Asia  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Unclear  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://aicasia.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: Lack of awareness in Internet policy issues in Asia Pacific  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
8. Initiative Name:  The Tech Coalition  
○ Date Established: 2005  
○ Mandate:  To drive critical advances in technology and the adoption of best 
practices fo r keeping children safe online. We convene and align the global tech 
industry, pool their knowledge and expertise, to help our members better prevent, 
detect, report, and remove online child sexual abuse content.  
○ Focus Area: Child Safety  
○ Members: 26 Membe rs including Google, Microsoft, and Meta  
○ Geographical Coverage:  Global  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
46 ○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.technologycoalition.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
9. Initiative Name:  Internet Works  
○ Date  Established: 1996  
○ Mandate:  To ensure our diverse collection of users is represented in important 
policy conversations and preserve the Internet as a place of limitless possibility.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Rights  
○ Members: 21 Members including Etsy, Glassdoor, and Reddit  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy:  Section 230  
○ Source: https://www.theinternet.works/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
10. Initiative Name:  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  
○ Date Established: 1963  
○ Mandate:  To foster technological innovation and excellence for the benefit of 
humanity. IEEE will be essential to the global technical community and to 
technical professionals everywhere, and b e universally recognized for the 
contributions of technology and of technical professionals in improving global 
conditions.  
○ Focus Area:  Technology for Good  
○ Members:  409,000 Undisclosed Members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability:  Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
47 ○ Source: https://www.ieee.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Members must pay membership fees.  
 
Government -Led Initiatives (TOTAL: 24)  
 
1. Initiative Name:  The Declaration for the Future of the Internet  
○ Date Established: 2022  
○ Mandate: To advance a positive vision for the Internet and digital technologies. It 
reclaims the promise of the Internet in the face of the global opportunities and 
challenges presented by the 21st century. It also reaffirms and recommits its 
partners to a single global Internet – one that is truly open and fosters 
competition, privacy, and respect for human rights.  
○ Focus Area: Policy Making  
○ Members: 60 members including Canada,  United States, and Ukraine  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source: https://www.state.gov/declaration -for-the-future -of-the-
internet#:~:text=Today%2C%20the%20United%20States%20with,the%20Interne
t%20and%20digital%20technologies . 
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
2. Initiative Name:  G7 Digital and Technology Ministers  
○ Date Established: 2021  
○ Mandate:  To place the needs of open, democratic societies at the centre of the 
technology debate and to work together towards a trusted, values -driven digital 
ecosystem. The G7 be lieves that such ecosystems must enhance prosperity in a 
way that is sustainable, inclusive and human -centric and has affirmed its 
opposition to measures which may undermine these democratic values, such as 
government -imposed Internet shutdowns and network  restrictions.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Cooperation and Digital Access  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
48 ○ Members: G-7 Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/g7 -digital -and-technology -
ministerial -declaration   
○ Gaps Identified: The mandate is housed within the UK government's official 
website, it does not have a dedicated page.  
○ Notes: This mandate does not seem to have an enforceable structure.  
 
3. Initiative Name: UNESCO Recommendations on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence  
○ Date Established: 2021  
○ Mandate: To address  ethical  issues  related  to  the  domain  of  Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) to the extent that they are within the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific, and Cultural Organization’s (UNESCO) mandate.  
○ Focus Area: AI and Technology for Good  
○ Mem bers: UN Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: The   General   Conference   of   the   United   Nations Educational,   
Scientific   and   Cultural Organization (UNESCO)  
○ Source: https: //unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000377897  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
4. Initiative Name: Digital Cooperation Organization (DCO)  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate:  To drive greater collaboration and cooperation across 
entrepreneurship, innovation, busin ess growth and employment in a shared 
digital economy. By promoting common interests and collaborative digital 
transformation, the DCO's mission is to enable members to empower women, 
youth and entrepreneurs to accelerate growth across the digital economy,  and 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
49 achieve greater prosperity by promoting common interests and collaborative 
digital transformation.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Economy  
○ Members: 8 members including Bahrain, Jordan, and Rwanda  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accounta bility: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://dco.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The website states that DCO has partners within the following 
fields: private companies, international organisations, NGOs academia, funds, 
and civil societies. The website is, howev er, unclear which organizations and 
where they are located.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
5. Initiative Name:  Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA)  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate:  To establish new approaches and collaborations in digital trade issues, 
promote interoperability between different regimes, and address new issues 
brought about by digitalisation.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Economy, Data Protection, AI, and Digital Inclusion  
○ Mem bers: Singapore, Chile, and New Zealand  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Majority  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.mti.gov.sg/Improving -Trade/Digital -Economy -
Agreements/The -Digital -Economy -Partnership -Agreement   
○ Gaps Identified: DEPA does not have its own website - it is housed in 
Singapore’s Ministry of Trade and Industry site.  
○ Notes: China applied to become a member of DEPA.  
 
6. Initiative Name: Digital Transformation Strategy for Africa  
○ Date Established: 2020  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
50 ○ Mandate: To harness digital technologies and innovation to transform African 
societies and economies to promote Africa's integratio n, generate inclusive 
economic growth, stimulate job creation, break the digital divide, and eradicate 
poverty for the continent’s socio -economic development and ensure Africa’s 
ownership of modern tools of digital management.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Inclusion , Digital Access, and Digital Economy  
○ Members: African Union Members States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: Policy and Regulatory Initiative for Digital Africa, the Programme for 
Infrastructu re Development in Africa, the African Continental Free Trade Area, 
and the African Union Financial Institutions  
○ Source: https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/38507 -doc-dts-english.pdf  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
7. Initiative Name: Global Partners hip on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI)  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate: To bridge the gap between theory and practice on AI by supporting 
cutting -edge research and applied activities on AI -related priorities. GPAI brings 
together engaged minds and expertise from science, industry, civil society, 
governments, international organizations and academia to foster international 
cooperation.  
○ Focus Area: AI 
○ Members: 25 members including Australia, Brazil, and India  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy:  OECD Going Digital project  
○ Source: https://gpai.ai/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: GPAI is the materialization of an idea developed within the G7.  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
51 8. Initiative Name: The United States -Mexico -Canada Agreement (USMCA)  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate: To create a more balanced, reciprocal trade supporting high -paying 
jobs for Americans and grow the North American economy. The USMCA 
proposes new chapters covering digital trade, anti corruption, and good 
regulatory practices.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Economy  
○ Members: Canada, Mexico, and U.S.  
○ Geographical Coverage: North America  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Enforceable  
○ Legacy: The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)  
○ Source: https://ustr.gov/usmca   
○ Gaps Identified: Replaces NAFTA  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
9. Initiative Name: African Union Cybersecurity Expert Group (AUCSEG)  
○ Date Established: 2019  
○ Mandate: To promote and strengthen the ongoing digital transfor mation in Africa 
by facilitating the coordination and information sharing among African countries & 
regions and different stakeholders, identifying cybersecurity areas where 
resources are needed, and advising on national, regional and continental 
strategie s and initiatives that should be prioritized.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity  
○ Members: African Union Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: The African Union Commission (AUC)  
○ Source: https://au.int/sites/default/files/pressreleases/37873 -pr-press_release -
_african_union_cybersecurity_expert_group_holds_its_first_inaugural_meeting.p
df 
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
52  
10. Initiative Name: OECD AI Policy Observatory  
○ Date Established: 2019  
○ Mand ate: To facilitate dialogue between stakeholders while providing 
multidisciplinary, evidence -based policy analysis in the areas where AI has the 
most impact.  
○ Focus Area: AI 
○ Members: OECD Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Conse nsus  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: The OECD AI Policy Observatory is Phase II of the OECD Going Digital 
Project  
○ Source: https://oecd.ai/en/   
○ Gaps Identified: Although OECD is a global organization, its members c omprise 
wealthier nations in the Americas and Europe. There are no official African 
member countries.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
11. Initiative Name: Cities Coalition for Digital Rights  
○ Date Established: 2018  
○ Mandate: To promote and defend digital rights in the urban contex t through city 
action, to resolve common digital challenges and work towards legal, ethical and 
operational frameworks to advance human rights in digital environments.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Rights and Technology for Good  
○ Members: 53 cities including Amman, NYC, and Sydney  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Enforceable  
○ Legacy: Internet Rights and Principles Coalition  
○ Source: https://citiesfordigitalrights.org/home  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
53 12. Initiative Name: European Union  General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  
○ Date Established: 2018  
○ Mandate: To impose privacy  and security standards onto organizations 
anywhere, so long as they target or collect data related to people in the EU.  
○ Focus Area: Data Protection  
○ Members: All EU (27) member countries and the United Kingdom. The GDPR 
applies to any entity/organization that processes the personal data of EU citizens 
or residents, or offers goods or services to such people, even if the 
entity/organizat ion is not located in the EU.  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Majority  
○ Accountability: Enforceable  
○ Legacy: European Convention on Human Rights (1950) and the European Data 
Protection Directive (1995)  
○ Source: https://gdpr.eu/  
○ Gaps Identifi ed: A common grievance by entities/companies operating in the EU 
is that the GDPR is vague and hard to interpret and that there's a lack of 
harmony among the member states in enforcing the GDPR.  
○ Notes: There are two tiers of penalties, which max out at €20  million or 4% of 
revenue (whichever is higher), if an entity violates the GDPR. The GDPR defines 
personal data as any information that relates to an individual who can be directly 
or indirectly identified. (Names, email addresses, location information, et hnicity, 
gender, biometric data, religious beliefs, web cookies, and political opinions, etc.)  
 
13. Initiative Name: Global Data Access Framework (GDAF)  
○ Date Established: 2018  
○ Mandate: To use the power of big data and artificial intelligence (AI) to achieve 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
○ Focus Area: AI and Digital Access  
○ Members: European Union Member States and the United Kingdom  
○ Geographical Coverage: Europe  
○ Approval Mechanism: Majority  
○ Accountability: Enforceable  
○ Legacy: The 2018 AI for Good Global Summit  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
54 ○ Source: https://www.unglobalpulse.org/policy/global -data-access -framework/   
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
14. Initiative Name: OECD Going Digital Project  
○ Date Established:  2017  
○ Mandate:  To help policy makers better understand the digital transformation that 
is underway and to develop appropriate policies to help shape a positive digital 
future. Since 2017, the project has supported policy makers in the quest to better 
understand digital transformation and the effects of digital technologies on our 
economies and societies, in an effort to shape a positive digital future.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance, AI, and Policy Making  
○ Members: OECD Member State s 
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.oecd.org/digital/going -digital -project/   
○ Gaps Identified:  Altho ugh OECD is a global organization, its members comprise 
wealthier nations in the Americas and Europe. There are no official African 
member countries.  
○ Notes: Phase I of the project concluded in 2019 with the Going Digital Summit 
and the release of two repor ts Going Digital: Shaping Policies, Improving Lives 
and Measuring the Digital Transformation: A Roadmap for the Future. Phase II 
launched the OECD.AI Policy Observatory in 2020. Phase III is focusing on data 
governance for growth and well -being and will co nclude in 2022. The OECD 
Going Digital project has also launched the Going Digital Integrated Policy 
Framework and the OECD Going Digital Toolkit to frame all of the OECD’s work 
on digital transformation.  
 
15. Initiative Name: G20 Digital Economy Development a nd Cooperation Initiative  
(DECI)  
○ Date Established: 2016  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
55 ○ Mandate:  To collectively leverage digital opportunities, cope with challenges, 
and promote the digital economy to drive inclusive economic growth and 
development.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance and Digital Economy  
○ Members:  G20 Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Consensus  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000185874.pdf   
○ Gaps Identified: DECI does not have a formal website and is confusing to 
follow. There are no clearly outlined activities that the member countries are 
undertaking.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
16. Initiative Name: African Declarati on on Internet Governance  
○ Date Established: 2014  
○ Mandate: To promote sustainable human development, build inclusive societies 
and improve the free information, ideas and opinions’ flow around the globe.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity and Digital Inclusion  
○ Memb ers: African Union Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: The Constitutive Act of the African Union and the Vision of the African 
Union expressed in its Agenda 2063  
○ Source: https://au.int/sites/default/files/newsevents/workingdocuments/33025 -
wd-african_declaration_on_internet_governance_en_0.pdf   
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
17.  Initiative Name: The World Internet Conference  
○ Date Established:  2014  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
56 ○ Mandate: To help build a cyberspace community with a consensual shared 
destiny and an ethic of respecting differences.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance  
○ Members: 11 members including Cyberspace Administration of China, United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and Economy and 
Information Technology Department of Zhejiang Province  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.wuzhenwic.org/   
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Government -led forum that includes multi -stakeholder participation. This 
includes Nokia, Tesla an d Qihoo 360 Technology.  
 
18. Initiative Name: SMART Africa  
○ Date Established: 2013  
○ Mandate: To accelerate sustainable socio -economic development on the African 
continent, ushering the continent into a knowledge economy through affordable 
access to Broadband and  usage of Information and Communications 
Technologies.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Inclusion, Digital Economy, and Digital Access  
○ Members: African Union Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: The Transform Africa Summit  
○ Source: https://smartafrica.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
19. Initiative Name: The European Cybercrime Centre (EC3)  
○ Date Established: 2013  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
57 ○ Mandate: To offer operational, strategic, analytical and forensic support to EU 
Member States’ cybercrime investigations. Cybercrimes include cyber -dependent 
crime , child sexual exploitation , and payment fraud.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity, Internet Security, and Child Safety  
○ Members: EU Member States and European citizens  
○ Geographical C overage: Europe  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Enforceable  
○ Legacy: Europol  
○ Source: https://www.europol.europa.eu/about -europol/european -cybercrime -
centre -ec3 
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
20. Initiative Name: Freedom Online Coalition  
○ Date Established: 2011  
○ Mandate:  To be a proactive coalition that ensures Internet freedom issues are on 
the international policy agenda as a way to drive concrete policy changes and 
outcomes.  
○ Focus Area: Policy Making, Digital Governance, and Digital Right s 
○ Members:  34 members including Argentina, Mongolia, and the United Kingdom  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://freedomonlinecoalition.com/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
21. Initiative Name: Open -Ended Working Group (OEWG)  
○ Date Established: 2009  
○ Mandate: To promote digital security.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity, Internet Security, and Digital Governance  
○ Members: All UN Member and Observer States  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
58 ○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: UN Human Rights Council  
○ Source: https://www.un.org/disarmament/open -ended -working -
group/#:~:text=Through%20resolution%2073%2 F27%2C%20the,the%20General
%20Assembly%20in%202020  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
22. Initiative Name: Group of Governmental Experts (GGE)  
○ Date Established: 2004  
○ Mandate: To advance responsible State behavior in cyberspace in the context of 
international secu rity. 
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity, Digital Governance, and Internet Security  
○ Members: Rotating UN Member State  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability: Enforceable  
○ Legacy: UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, UN General Assem bly 
○ Source: https://www.un.org/disarmament/group -of-governmental -experts/   
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Also important website: https://dig.watch/processes/un -gge. Since 2004, 
there have been six GGE meetings.  
 
23. Initiative Name:  Information Technology Agreement (ITA)  
○ Date Established: 1996  
○ Mandate: To eliminate tariffs on IT products covered by the agreement.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Economy and Digital Governance  
○ Members:  82 members including China, the European Union, and the U.S.  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountabili ty: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
59 ○ Source:  https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/inftec_e/inftec_e.htm  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
24. Initiative Name:  World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)  
○ Date Established: 1967  
○ Mandate: To lead the development of a balanced and effective international 
intellectual property (IP) system that enables innovation and creativity for the 
benefit of all.  
○ Focus Area: Tech Innovation and Digital Economy  
○ Members: UN Member States  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Consensus  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.wipo.int/portal/en/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
Civil Society -Led Initiatives (TOTAL: 23)  
 
1. Initiative Name:  Non-Profit Cyber  
○ Date Established: 2022  
○ Mandate: To build awareness of the work of cybersecurity nonprofits globally 
and align their work to achieve the greatest effect. Envisioned as a 
“collaboration -of-equals,” each member organization has committed to work in 
coordinati on to better serve Internet users globally.  
○ Focus Area:  Cybersecurity  
○ Members: 22 members including Anti -Phishing Working Group, the Center for 
Internet Security, and the Global Cyber Alliance  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Consensus  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
60 ○ Source:  https://nonprofitcyber.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The mechanism was recently created so that is not enough 
information on its accomplishments.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
2. Initiative Name: Democracy and Tech Initiative  
○ Date Established: 2021  
○ Mandate:  To create policy practices that align global stakeholders toward tech 
and governance that reinforce, rather than undermine, open societies. The 
Initiative builds on the DFRLab’s established track record and leadership in the  
open -source field, empowering global communities to promote transparency and 
accountability online and around the world. The Initiative examines 
how the tech that connects and informs people is funded, built, and governed, and 
how that affects the viabili ty of rights -respecting and democratic societies around 
the world.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity, Policy Making, Human Rights, and Digital 
Governance  
○ Members:  22 individual experts, fellows and scholars  
○ Geographical Coverage:  Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclea r 
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/programs/digital -forensic -research -
lab/democracy -and-tech-initiative/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
3. Initiative Name:  ForHumanity  
○ Date Established: 2021  
○ Mandate: To examine and analyze the downside risks associated with the 
ubiquitous advance of AI & Automation, to engage in risk mitigation and ensure 
the optimal outcome… ForHumanity.  
○ Focus Area:  AI 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
61 ○ Members: 700 individual members and contributors from 68 countries, including 
Australia, Brazil, and the U.S.  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://forhumanity.center/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
4. Initiative Name:  Reset Initiative  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate:  To build a global network of public service partners to help restore the 
critical connection between media and democracy.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Cooperation and Digital Governance  
○ Members: 23 individual techno logists, analysts, researchers, advocates, and 
policy experts  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://www.reset.tech/about/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: The Reset Initiative collabo rates with other donors to attract long -term 
funding for civil society organisations engaged in the democracy and technology 
problem. In addition to the Initiative's core Staff members, they also have an 
Advisory Council (whose members broadly guide, infor m, and advance our 
network) as well as a Network Investment Council.  
 
5. Initiative Name: Africa Cybersecurity and Digital Rights Organization  
○ Date Established: 2019  
○ Mandate: To promote cybersecurity awareness, capacity building, capacity 
development. and training within the Africa continent and beyond.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
62 ○ Focus Area: AI, Cybersecurity, Child Safety, Digital Governance, Data 
Protection, Digital Rights, and Human Rights  
○ Members:  Media Foundation for Western Africa, Global Partners Digital, and 
Parad Initiati  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source:  http://acdro.org/  
○ Gaps Identified:  It was not possible to find any reports on their work.  
○ Notes:  It promotes online courses training to train a workforce to manage 
Africa’s cybersecurity threats and mitigate risk to business shutdowns from 
cyber -attacks.  
 
6. Initiative Name: Data Trade and Global Governance Hub (GWU)  
○ Date Established: 2019  
○ Mandate: To help stakeholders and policymakers und erstand digital trade and 
data governance issues through conducting evidence -based -research, connect 
stakeholders to experts, serve as a resource and build an understanding of data 
governance and trade issues in the US and abroad.  
○ Focus Area: Data Protecti on, Digital Economy, Digital Governance, and Policy 
Making  
○ Members: 4 members including Charles Koch Foundation, Center for 
International Business Education and Research, and Georgetown University 
Institute for Data, Governance and Politics  
○ Geographical Coverage:  Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source:  https://datagovhub.elliott.gwu.edu/  
○ Gaps Identified:  N/A 
○ Notes: They are developing a Global Data Governance Mapping with more than 
50 countries so  far (https://datagovhub.letsnod.com/)  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
63 7. Initiative Name: Americas Institute for Cybersecurity Leadership (AICL)  
○ Date Established: 2018  
○ Mandate: To impact global cybersecurity challenges, provide strategic insights 
and foster cybersecurity leadership for  a safer digital society.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity and Internet Security  
○ Members: 4 members including the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, Stop.Think.Connect., and Girls Who Code  
○ Geographical Coverage: North America and South America  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A  
○ Source: https://americascybersecurity.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: It is difficult to find information regarding main partners in the 
website or even through Google research. It is unc lear if there are more 
members apart from the U.S. national mechanisms.  
○ Notes:  It had focus in the Americas region but the main partners are all from the 
United States.  
 
8. Initiative Name: Machine Intelligence Research Institute  
○ Date Established: 2015  
○ Manda te: To develop formal tools for the clean design and analysis of general -
purpose AI systems, with the intent of making such systems safer and more 
reliable when they are developed.  
○ Focus Area: AI 
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval M echanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://intelligence.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
9. Initiative Name:  Allen Institute for AI  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
64 ○ Date Established: 2014  
○ Mandate: To conduct high -impact AI research and engineering in service of the 
common good.  
○ Focus Area: AI and Technology for Good  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://allenai.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: The Institute has a board of directors (7) alongside a scientific advisory 
board (8)  
 
10. Initiative Name: Global Partners Digital  
○ Date Established: 2013  
○ Mandate: To bring laws and policies relating to the digital environment more i n 
line with international human rights standards, monitor and analyze trends, build 
stakeholder capacity, foster alliances and coordinate action, and advocate.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance  
○ Members: 25 members including the Asociación por los Derechos Ci viles 
(Argentina), the Freedom Online Coalition, and the Global Network Initiative  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights 
(https://www. gp-digital.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/04/OHCHR -UNGPs -and-
Tech -Companies -Consultation_GPD -Submission.pdf) Actively engage in the 
discussions in the UN First Committee’s Open -Ended Working Group on ICTs.  
○ Source:  https://www.gp -digital.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
11. Initiative Name: The GovLab (NYU)  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
65 ○ Date Established: 2013  
○ Mandate: To strengthen the ability of institutions – including but not limited to 
governments – and people to work more openly, collaboratively, effectively and 
legitimately to make b etter decisions and solve public problems through the use 
of data.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance  
○ Members: 55 members including Agence Francaise De Developpement, 
Bertelsmann Foundation, and Democracy Fund  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: UNICEF collaboration on Data Collaboratives to Improve Children’s 
Lives  
○ Source:  https://thegovlab.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
12. Initiative Name: Global Catastrophic Risk Institute  
○ Date Established: 2011  
○ Mandate: To develop best ways to confront humanity’s gravest threats that could 
significantly harm or even destroy human civilization at the global scale.  
○ Focus Area: AI 
○ Members: Unclear  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://gcrinstitute.org/   
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
13. Initiative Name:  Instituto Igarapé  
○ Date Established: 2011  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
66 ○ Mandate: To serve as a channel that  facilitates the integration of security, 
climate and technology agendas and, at the same time, acts as a bridge of 
dialogue between decision makers and civil society, and between the global and 
local spheres.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity and Digital Governan ce 
○ Members:  No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: North America, South America, and Europe  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  Summary of the We the Peoples Digital Consultation and the UN 
Common Agenda  
○ Source:  https://igarape.org.br/en  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Over 70 partners including Instituto Betty e A. Jacob Lafer (Brazil), 
International Peace Institute (IPI) (USA), and  Jigsaw - Google Ideas (USA)  
 
14. Initiative Name:  C-Minds  
○ Date Established: 2009  
○ Mandate: To future -proof communities, governments, and companies in light of 
the accelerated digital transformation by contributing to more inclusive and 
human -centered public pol icy and advancing the debate around ethical tech.  
○ Focus Area:  AI, Digital Inclusion, and Human Rights  
○ Members:  No members  
○ Geographical Coverage:  South America  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Consensus  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://www.cminds .co/ 
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: 7 partners including the Inter -American Development Bank (BID), Open 
Data Institute, and the Tecnologico de Monterrey  
 
15. Initiative Name:  Centre for Internet and Society  
○ Date Established: 2008  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
67 ○ Mandate: To conduct research on Internet and digital technologies from policy 
and academic perspectives  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance and Policy Making  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://cis -india.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
16. Initiative Name: Social Media Exchange (SMEX)  
○ Date Established: 2008  
○ Mandate: To advance digital rights in Lebanon and the Arab region through 
research, campaigns, and advocacy that encourages users to engage critically 
with digital technologies, media, and networks.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Rights  
○ Members:  No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://smex.org /  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: The website does not provide a lot of information about the members or 
supporters.  
 
17. Initiative Name: Red Clara  
○ Date Established: 2004  
○ Mandate: To strengthen the development of science, education, culture and 
innovation in Lat in America through the innovative use of advanced networks.  
○ Focus Area:  Tech Innovation and Digital Access  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
68 ○ Members: 9 members including REUNA (Chile), Corporación Ecuatoriana para 
el Desarrollo de la Investigación y la Academia (Ecuador), and Ragie 
(Guatem ala) 
○ Geographical Coverage: South America  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.redclara.net/index.php/en/  
○ Gaps Identified: It is largely focused on academia and enabling network access.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
18. Initiative Name: Centre for International Governance Innovation  
○ Date Established: 2001  
○ Mandate: To build bridges from knowledge to power by conducting world -leading 
research and analysis to offer innovative policy solutions for the digital era.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Governance and Internet Security  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage:  North America  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.cigionline.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: Focus on academic research  
○ Notes: Founding supporters include the City of Waterloo, the Government of 
Canada, and the Government of Ontario. Partners include the Balsillie School of 
International Affairs (BSIA), Council of Councils (CoC), Forum on Information and 
Democracy,  International Development Research Centre (IDRC), International 
Economics Association (IEA) and the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET)  
 
19. Initiative Name: The Geneva Internet Platform's Digital Watch Observatory  
○ Date Established: 1997  
○ Mandate: To pr ovide a neutral one -stop shop for the latest cybersecurity 
developments, overviews, events, actors, instruments, and other resources. The 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
69 observatory is part of the Geneva Internet Platform, an initiative of the Swiss 
authorities, operated by DiploFoundati on. 
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity and Human Rights  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: An Introduction to Internet Governance by Dr Jovan Kurbalija (book)  
○ Source: https://dig.watch/topics  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: 30 individual experts  
 
20. Initiative Name:  Internet Society  
○ Date Established: 1992  
○ Mandate: To empower people to keep the Internet a force for good: open, 
globally connected, secure, and trustworthy.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Access and Technology for Good  
○ Members: 87 unspecified organization members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.internetsociety.org/   
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
21. Initiative Name:  Association for Progressive Communications  
○ Date Established: 1990  
○ Mandate: To create a just and sustainable world by harnessing the collective 
power of activists, organizat ions, excluded groups, communities and social 
movements, to challenge existing power structures and ensure that the Internet 
is developed and governed as a global public good.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Rights, Digital Access, and Human Rights  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
70 ○ Members: 65 members  including the Arid Lands Information Network (Kenya), 
the Digital Empowerment Foundation (DEF) (India), and Colnodo (Colombia)  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.apc.org/e n/ 
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
22. Initiative Name: Electronic Frontier Foundation  
○ Date Established: 1990  
○ Mandate: To create a global digital environment that upholds both human rights 
and constitutional rights, and take on cutting -edge legal cases to win victories for 
user rights.  
○ Focus Area: Data Protection and Human Rights  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://www.eff.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
23. Initiative Name:  Privacy International (PI)  
○ Date Established: 1990  
○ Mandate: To protect democracy, defend people's dignity, and demand 
accountability from institutions who breach public trust.  
○ Focus Area:  Data Protection and Digital Access  
○ Members: No mem bers  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
71 ○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://privacyinternational.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Privacy International’s governing body is the Board of Trustees. The 
primary responsibility of the Board is to provide strategic leadership by 
formulating and reviewing Privacy International's strategic aims in consultation 
with staff, setting overall policy, regularly evaluating the charity's performance, 
and ensuring comp liance with UK law. The board meets up to four times a year. 
New Trustees are recruited through an open application process. Appointments 
are made not only on the basis of individual merit, but also taking into 
consideration the existing expertise and expe rience of the Trustees, as well as 
PI's equal opportunities policy.  
 
Multi -stakeholder -Led Initiatives (TOTAL: 42)  
 
1. Initiative Name: The Datasphere Initiative  
○ Date Established:  2021  
○ Mandate:  To responsibly unlock the value of data for all through bringin g a new, 
holistic and positive approach to the governance of the datasphere, improve 
coordination and accelerate the adoption of concrete proposals to overcome the 
current tensions and polarization around data.  
○ Focus Area: Data Protection and Digital Gove rnance  
○ Members: 25 members including the Development Bank of Latin America (CAF), 
the Government of Germany Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy 
(BMWi), and Microsoft  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: Mapping on data governance organizations ecosystem  
○ Source:  https://www.thedatasphere.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The mechanism was recently created so that is not enough 
information on its accomplishments.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
72 ○ Notes: The mechanism is calling for mo re partnerships 
(https://www.thedatasphere.org/wp -content/uploads/2022/04/Datasphere -
Initiative -Partnerships -brochure -2022.pdf)  
 
2. Initiative Name: Prosperity Collaborative  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate:  Developing new technologies to improve how tax administrations 
work, improving local capacity, and advocating open source technology 
governance models that promote transparency and interoperability.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance  
○ Members: 5 members includ ing the World Bank Group, MIT Connection 
Science, and EY  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Operational  
○ Legacy:  N/A  
○ Source: https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/taxes -and-government -
revenue/brief/prosperity -collaborative  
○ Gaps Identified: There is only one World Bank website explaining the 
mechanism. It was not possible to find other information.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
3. Initiative Name: Road map for Digital Cooperation  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate: To build an inclusive digital economy and society, develop human and 
institutional capacity, protect human rights and human agency, promote digital 
trust, security and stability, and foster global  digital cooperation.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Inclusion, Digital Economy, and Digital Cooperation  
○ Members: UN Member States and over 300 companies, organizations and 
governments including Facebook, Internet Society, and Digital Impact Alliance  
○ Geographical Cov erage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: The UN Secretary General  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
73 ○ Source: https://www.un. org/en/content/digital -cooperation -
roadmap/assets/pdf/Roadmap_for_Digital_Cooperation_EN.pdf   
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: In July 2018, the Secretary -General convened a High -level Panel on 
Digital Cooperation to advance proposals to strengthen cooperation in the digital 
space among Governments, the private sector, civil society, international 
organizations, academic institutions, the technical community and other relevant 
stakeholders. Co -chaired by Melinda Gates and Jack Ma, the 20 members of the 
Panel ser ved in their personal capacities, representing an unprecedented mix of 
disciplines and sectors and geographic, gender and age diversity. In follow -up to 
the report, eight virtual Roundtable groups involving numerous governments, 
companies and organizations  were convened to discuss if and how the 
recommendations can be advanced.  
 
4. Initiative Name: The Global Encryption Coalition (GEC)  
○ Date Established:  2020  
○ Mandate: To promote and defend encryption in key countries and multilateral 
fora where it is under thre at. The GEC also supports efforts by companies to 
offer encrypted services to their users.  
○ Focus Area: Internet Security  
○ Members: 200 members in addition to the Center for Democracy & Technology, 
Global Partners Digital, and the Internet Society  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.globalencryption.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
5. Initiative Name:  Trust Over IP (ToIP) Foundation  
○ Date Established: 2020  
○ Mandate:  To work on issues related to digital identity, verifiable credential, 
blockchain technology, and secure communications spaces.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
74 ○ Focus Area: Policy Making and Digital Governance  
○ Members: 20 Members including Accenture, The Gov ernment of British 
Columbia, and GS1 US  
○ Geographical Coverage:  Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://trustoverip.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
6. Initiative Name:  Digital Public Goods Initiative  
○ Date Established: 2019  
○ Mandate:  To accelerate the attainment of the sustainable development goals in 
low- and middle -income countries by facilitating the discovery, development, use 
of, and investment in digital public goods.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance, T echnology for Good, and Digital Economy  
○ Members: 7 Members including German Federal Ministry for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (BMZ), iSPIRT, and UNICEF  
○ Geographical Coverage:  Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Consensus  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  Within its partners, the mechanism launched Digital Public Goods 
Alliance 5 Year Strategy (2021 -2026), available at 
https://digitalpublicgoods.net/DPGA_Strategy_2021 -2026.pdf  
○ Source: https://digitalpublicgoods.net/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes:  It created a Digital Public Goods Alliance Roadmap, a public visualization 
of the core, coordinated and aligned activities undertaken by other organizations 
working to advance digital public goods. (https://digitalpublicgoods.ne t/roadmap/)  
 
7. Initiative Name:  Content Authenticity Initiative  
○ Date Established:  2019  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
75 ○ Mandate:  To promote and provide an open, cross -industry approach to media 
transparency so people across the Internet can better evaluate content 
provenance.  
○ Focus Area: Data Protection  
○ Members: 400 members including the European Commission, Microsoft, and 
World Wildlife Fund  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://contentauthenticity.org/  
○ Gaps Id entified: The initiative is aspirational but works with The Coalition for 
Content Provenance and Authenticity (C2PA), which is a formal coalition 
dedicated exclusively to drafting technical standards and specifications as a 
foundation for universal content  provenance. The C2PA is a mutually governed 
standards development organization (SDO) under the structure of the Linux 
Foundation’s Joint Development Foundation.  
○ Notes: NA 
 
8. Initiative Name: Cyber Peace Institute  
○ Date Established:  2019  
○ Mandate: To reduce t he frequency, impact and scale of cyberattacks, and to 
hold actors accountable for the harm they cause. The Institute also delivers 
support to Humanitarian NGOs and the healthcare sector, as well as engages in 
multilateral fora to raise awareness of the ri sks of cyberattacks for people, and 
call for respect of their rights and laws.  
○ Focus Area:  Cybersecurity  
○ Members:  17 members including the GFCE, Ostrom Workshop, and the Trust 
Valley  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Consensus  
○ Accountabilit y: Operational  
○ Legacy: Position Paper submitted to the ‘Open -Ended Working Group on 
Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
76 of International Security’ and the ‘Group of Governmental Experts on Advancing 
Responsible St ate Behaviour in Cyberspace in the Context of International 
Security. They developed a guide to understand the UN Cybersecurity process 
(https://cyberpeaceinstitute.org/united -nations -cybersecurity -process -explained/)  
○ Source:  https://cyberpeaceinstitute.o rg/  
○ Gaps Identified:  N/A 
○ Notes: When the CyberPeace Institute was founded in 2019, it received initial 
funding from several corporate donors and foundations. Initial donors were the 
Hewlett Foundation, Mastercard, Microsoft, the Ford Foundation and Facebook.  
 
9. Initiative Name:  Digital Re ach 
○ Date Established: 2019  
○ Mandate: To safeguard digital rights and internet freedom in Southeast Asia. 
Digital Reach’s work revolves around three core strategies which include 
research and monitoring, advocacy, and community building and empowerment.  
○ Focus Area:  Human Rights and Digital Rights  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Asia  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source:  https://digitalreach. asia/about/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Created a subsidiary in 2021 - the Southeast Asian Coalition On Tech 
Accountability (SEACT). Their advocacy work involves stakeholders at the 
national, regional, and international level. Their approach is based on th e local 
context for maximize the impact of our work. They look at possibilities to work 
with local partners, engage in the regional human rights mechanism particularly 
at ASEAN, and address the issues of digital rights in Southeast Asia with 
international stakeholders.  
 
10. Initiative Name:  G20 Global Smart Cities Alliance on Technology Governance  
○ Date Established: 2019  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
77 ○ Mandate: To unite municipal, regional and national governments, private -sector 
partners and cities’ residents around a shared set of principles  for the 
responsible and ethical use of smart city technologies.  
○ Focus Area: Technology for Good  
○ Members: More than 200,000 members including World Economic Forum, 
Salesforce, and Cities for All  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: The World Economic Forum and the International Organization for 
Public -Private Cooperation  
○ Source: https://globalsmartcitiesalliance.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
11. Initiative Name: Charter of Trust  
○ Date Established: 2018  
○ Mandate: To lead global companies and organizations who seek to work 
together in making the digital world of tomorrow safer.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity  
○ Members: 27 Members including Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der 
Informationstechnik, IBM, and CyberPeace Institute  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Signatory  
○ Accountability: Unclear  
○ Legacy: Munich Security Conference  
○ Source: https://www.chartero ftrust.com/about/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
12. Initiative Name:  The Africa Digital Rights’ Hub (ADRH)  
○ Date Established:  2018  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
78 ○ Mandate: To bring together regulators, academic researchers, stakeholders, 
policy makers, regional, industry experts, and inter national bodies to address 
data protection and privacy issues on the Continent.  
○ Focus Area: Capacity Building and Data Protection  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source:  https://dataprotectionafrica.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: This is a summit, held yearly since 2018.  
○ Notes: Partners include Facebook, Nsiah Akuetteh, and Co. and Hewlett 
Foundation  
 
13. Initiative  Name: The Digital ASEAN Initiative  
○ Date Established: 2018  
○ Mandate: To work on the issues that will underpin a regional digital economy in 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) so that the benefits of the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution can be fully unlocked and become a force for 
regional economic inclusion.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity and Digital Economy  
○ Members: 10 members including the Department of Information and 
Communications Technology of the Philippines,Tokopedia, and the World 
Economic Forum  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: The World Economic Forum  
○ Source: https://www.weforum.org/projects/digital -asean  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
14. Initiative Name: Algorithm Watch  
○ Date Established: 2017  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
79 ○ Mandate:  To evaluate and shed light on algorithmic decision making processes 
that have a social relevance, meaning they are used either to predict or prescribe 
human action or to make decisions automatically.  
○ Focus Area: AI and Policy Making  
○ Members:  9 members including the Eu ropean AI Fund, Civitates, and the Hans 
Böckler Stiftung  
○ Geographical Coverage: Europe  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source:  https://algorithmwatch.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: Focuses on academic research  
○ Notes:  N/A 
 
15. Initiative Name: Digital Impact Alliance (DIAL)  
○ Date Established: 2016  
○ Mandate: To overcome the systemic barriers preventing digital solutions from 
going to scale. DIAL produces, curates and disseminates evidence -based 
products packaged with easy -to-unders tand guidance so that country 
governments, technology companies, the development community and other 
implementers can quickly use them to inform ongoing efforts to fund, design and 
deploy digital services to more people.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance and  Tech Innovation  
○ Members: 4 members including the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the U.S. 
Agency for International Development (USAID), and the Swedish International 
Development Agency (Sida)  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source: https://digitalimpactalliance.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Housed within the United Nations Foundation  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
80 16. Initiative Name: CyberSec - European Cybersecurity Forum (CYBERSEC)  
○ Date Established: 2015  
○ Mandate: To deliver a platform for a high -level, multi -stakeholder, cross -
sectional and inclusive debate on the most pressing challenges and potential 
opportunities for the global digital ecosystem, fostering cooperation among like -
minded partners across the globe.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity  
○ Members: 21 Members including the CYBERSEC Forum, European 
Commission, and NATO  
○ Geographical Coverage: Europe  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://cybersecforum.eu  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
17. Initiative Name: Digital Square  
○ Date Established: 2015  
○ Mandate: To strengthen country efforts in developing national digital health 
infrastructures.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Governance and Policy Making  
○ Members: 63 members including UNICEF, Apelon Inc. and Harvard University  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism : Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: UNICEF/WHO Digital Health Center of Excellence (DICE), Digital 
Square, and the newly formed UNICEF/WHO Digital Health Center of Excellence 
(DICE)  
○ Source: https://digitalsquare.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The decision -making is unclear – if it is through the Board 
members or through mechanisms involved.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
81 18. Initiative Name: Global Forum on Cyber Expertise (GFCE)  
○ Date Established: 2015  
○ Mandate: To strengthen cyber capacity and expertise globally. The GFC E 
endeavors to be a pragmatic, action -orientated, and flexible platform for 
international collaboration, reducing overlap and duplication of efforts in the cyber 
capacity building ecosystem to ensure an open, free, peaceful and secure digital 
world.  
○ Focus Area: Capacity Building  
○ Members: 41 members including the Dutch Government and other high -level 
representatives from business and international organizations  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: 2015 Global Conference on Cyber Space in the Hague  
○ Source: https://thegfce.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The full list of members is not identified.  
○ Notes: The GFCE is also a platform for high -level discussion, organizing 
biannual meetings to assess progress and hold policy discussions on ways and 
means of responding to emerging challenges in the cyber capacity building 
domain. Multi -stakeholder GFCE events contribute to the development of best 
practices and therefore have added value for the wider cy ber capacity building 
community globally. The GFCE intends to hold inaugural regional meetings 
across five continents in 2021, improving the platform’s regional coordination and 
presence.  
 
19. Initiative Name: Cyber Policy Institute (CPI)  
○ Date Established: 2014 
○ Mandate:  To facilitate cybersecurity dialogue between governments, industry 
and the civil society. Standing for an inclusive and balanced discourse on 
international cyber peace and security as well as national development, CPI 
seeks to contribute to all and any efforts to maintain and design information and 
communication technologies in a safe, open and transparent manner that for us 
is a prerequisite of international peace and security, economic prosperity as well 
as societal and individual empowerment.  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
82 ○ Focus Area:  Cybersecurity, Digital Rights, Internet Security, and Policy Making  
○ Members: 4 members including ICT for Peace Foundation, Government of 
Estonia, and Tallinn University of Technology  
○ Geographical Coverage: Europe  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: UNGGE  
○ Source: https://cpi.ee/  
○ Gaps Identified: No private sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
20. Initiative Name: NETmundial – Global Multi -stakeholder Meeting on the Future of 
Internet Governance  
○ Date Established: 2014  
○ Mandate:  To gather international entities of the various stakeholders involved 
with Internet governance in a meeting to elaborate on the principles of Internet 
governance and create a proposal for a roadmap for the future development of 
this ecosystem.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Governance and Digital Cooperation  
○ Members: 15 members including 1Net, the Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs (DESA), and the European Commission  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source: https://netmundial.br/  
○ Gaps Identified: This conference only took place in 2014.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
21. Initiative Name: Open Smart Register Platform  
○ Date Established: 2014  
○ Mandate: To enable data-driven decision making at all levels of the health 
system.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Inclusion  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
83 ○ Members:  36 members including the GAVI, Johnson & Johnson, the World 
Health Organization  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Consensus  
○ Accountabilit y: Unclear  
○ Legacy: THRIVE (Technologies for Health Registers, Information, and Vital 
Events) Study  
○ Source:  https://smartregister.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: No government sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
22. Initiative Name: African Declaration on Internet Rights and Fre edoms (AfDec)  
○ Date Established:  2013  
○ Mandate:  To promote human rights standards and principles of openness in 
Internet policy formulation and implementation on the African continent. The 
Declaration is intended to elaborate on the principles which are nece ssary to 
uphold human and people’s rights on the Internet, and to cultivate an Internet 
environment that can best meet Africa’s social and economic development needs 
and goals.  
○ Focus Area:  Digital Rights and Human Rights  
○ Members: 25 members including the Africa Center for Media Excellence, 
CIVICUS, and Adamu & Co.  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (1981), Windhoek 
Declaration on Promoting an Independent and Pluralistic African Press (1991), 
African Charter on Broadcasting (2001), Declaration of Principles on Freedom of 
Expression in Africa (2002), African Platform on Access to Information 
Declaration (2011)  
○ Source: https://africaninternetri ghts.org/en  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
84 23. Initiative Name:  African School on Internet Governance (AfriSIG)  
○ Date Established:  2013  
○ Mandate: To develop a pipeline of leading Africans from diverse sectors, 
backgrounds and ages with the skills to participate in local and international 
Internet governance structures, and shape the future of the Internet landscape 
for Africa's development.  
○ Focus A rea: Digital Cooperation and Digital Governance  
○ Members: 20 members including the African Union, Facabook, and the Ford 
Foundation  
○ Geographical Coverage:  Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://afrisig.org / 
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
24. Initiative Name:  Digital Due Process  
○ Date Established: 2013  
○ Mandate: To modernize surveillance laws for the Internet age.  
○ Focus Area: Internet Security and Policy Making  
○ Members: 140 members including the Asian Americans  Advancing Justice, 
Airbnb, and the Internet Association  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Unclear  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://digitaldueprocess.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: No government sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
25. Initiative Name: Africa Internet Summit (AIS)  
○ Date Established: 2012  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
85 ○ Mandate: To share Information and Communications Technology (ICT) 
knowledge within the African region by bringing the ICT business and technical 
community in Africa together under one roof to discuss ICT issues and 
challenges. AIS is an annual, regional, multi -stakeholder ICT conference. It is the 
pinnacle educational and business ICT event in Africa where key players in the 
Internet industry can interact with the global Internet community.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity and Digital Governance  
○ Members: 17 members includ ing ICANN, Internet Society, and AfricaCert  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy:  N/A  
○ Source: https://www.internetsummit.africa/  
○ Gaps Identified: No government sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
26. Initiative Name: ATPS  
○ Date Established: 2012  
○ Mandate: To improve the quality of science, technology and innovation systems 
research and policy making in Africa by strengthening capacity for science and 
technology knowledge generation, communication and dissemination,  use and 
mastery for sustainable development in Africa.  
○ Focus Area: Tech Innovation and Policy Making  
○ Members: 1500 unspecified members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://atpsnet.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: ATPS has over 1,500 members and 3000 stakeholders in over 51 
countries in 5 continents with institutional partnerships worldwide. They 
implement their programs through members in national chapters established in 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
86 30 countries (27 in Africa and 3 Diaspora chapters in Australia, United States of 
America, and United Kingdom) with its secretariat in Nairobi Kenya  
 
27. Initiative Name:  Better than Cash Alliance  
○ Date Established: 2012 
○ Mandate: To accelerate the transition from cash to responsible digital payments 
in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Economy  
○ Members: 80 members including the Bill and Gates Foundation, Chemonics, 
and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
○ Geographical Coverage:  Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: No Objection  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy:  The Digital Wages Summit convened by the Alliance  
○ Source: https://www.betterthancash.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: Based in the United Nations  
 
28. Initiative Name:  Internet & Jurisdiction Policy Network (I&JPN)  
○ Date Established:  2012  
○ Mandate: To develop policy standards and operational solutions to pressing 
legal challenges at the intersection of the global digi tal economy, human rights 
and security.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance  
○ Members: 27 members including the European Commission, ICANN, and 
Google  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: UN SG High -Level Panel on Digital Cooperation Report  
○ Source: https://www.internetjurisdiction.net/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes:  The work of the organization has been presented to and recognized by 
key international processes, including the UN Internet Governance Forum, the  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
87 UN Secretary -General’s High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation, G7, G20 or the 
Paris Peace Forum, and covered in top media outlets such as The Economist, 
New York Times, Washington Post, Financial Times, Politico or Fortune.  
 
29. Initiative Name: Fight for th e Future  
○ Date Established: 2012  
○ Mandate: To harness the power of the Internet to channel outrage into action, 
defending our most basic rights in the digital age. We fight to ensure that 
technology is a force for empowerment, free expression, and liberation  rather 
than tyranny, corruption, and structural inequality.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Rights  
○ Members: Unclear  
○ Geographical Coverage: Unclear  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Unclear   
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.fightforthefuture.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The website does not define much information regarding the 
initiative’s structure.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
30. Initiative Name: Access Now  
○ Date Established: 2009  
○ Mandate: To defend and extend the digital rights of users  at risk around the 
world by providing helplines, policy recommendations, advocacy, grants, 
rightscon, and legal support.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Rights, Internet Security, and Policy Making  
○ Members:  12 members including the Coalition Against Unlawful Surveill ance 
Exports, Save the Internet – E.U., ShareAction, and Stop Watching Us  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.acce ssnow.org/about -us/ 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
88 ○ Gaps Identified: No government sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
31. Initiative Name: EastWest Institute - Global Cooperation in Cyberspace  
○ Date Established: 2009  
○ Mandate: To reduce conflict, crime and other disruptions in cyberspace and 
promote stability, innovation and inclusion.  
○ Focus Area: Cybersecurity and Digital Inclusion  
○ Members: 10 members including Microsoft, Huawei Technologies, and the 
Munich Security Conference  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.eastwest.ngo/pillars/global -cooperation -cyberspace  
○ Gaps Identified: No government sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
32. Initiative Name: NetMission.Asia  
○ Date Established: 2009  
○ Mandate:  To engage and empower youth on Internet governance discourse with 
the aim of enhancing youth mobility and creating impact in Asia. NetMission.Asia 
is an academy that covers a wide range of Inte rnet governance topics that 
provide youth the basic understanding about the current issues at stake with an 
emphasis on the multi -stakeholder approach. Upon completion, fellows of the 
Academy will be awarded an e -certificate and be listed on our website wi th the 
class year.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Asia  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Unclear  
○ Legacy: DotAsia Organization and the Hong Kong Youth Internet Governance 
Forum  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
89 ○ Source:  https://netmission.asia/about -us/what -is-netmission -asia/  
○ Gaps Identified: Regional collaboration rather than membership model, 
subsidiary of DotAsia Organization  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
33. Initiative Name: Euro pean Dialogue on Internet Governance (EuroDIG)  
○ Date Established: 2008  
○ Mandate:  To foster dialogue and collaboration with the Internet community on 
public policy for the Internet – culminating in an annual conference that takes 
place in a different European  city every year.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance and Policy Making  
○ Members: 10 members including the European Regional At -Large Organization 
(EURALO), Geneva Internet Platform, and Internet Society (ISOC)  
○ Geographical Coverage: Europe  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy: Internet Governance Forum (IGF)  
○ Source: https://www.eurodig.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: No private sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
34. Initiative Name: Future of Privacy Forum (FPF)  
○ Date Established:  2008  
○ Mandate:  To bring together industry, academics, consumer advocates, and other 
thought leaders to explore the challenges posed by technological innovation and 
develop privacy protections, ethical norms, and workable business practices. 
Through research, publications, educational meetings, expert testimony, and 
other related activities, FPF works with organizations and governments to shape 
best practices and policies, in the United States and globally.  
○ Focus Area: AI, Data Protection, and Di gital Governance  
○ Members: 200 members including Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Chan 
Zuckerberg Initiative, and Robert Wood Johnson Foundation  
○ Geographical Coverage: North America, Europe, and Asia  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
90 ○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: Comments to United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights Special Rapporteur  
○ Source:  https://fpf.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: The mechanism is largely focused on the academia results. No 
government sector members.  
○ Notes:  N/A 
 
35. Initiative N ame: The Global Network Initiative (GNI)  
○ Date Established: 2008  
○ Mandate: To protect and advance freedom of expression and privacy rights in 
the  Information and Communications Technology (ICT) industry by setting a 
global standard for responsible company decision making and serving as a multi -
stakeholder voice in the face of government restrictions and demands.  
○ Focus Area:  Internet Security  
○ Members: 72 members including the George Washington Law, Global Forum for 
Media Development, Google, and Internet Fre edom Foundation  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: None  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://globalnetworkinitiative.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: No government sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
36. Initiative Name: Information Technology and Innovation Foundation  
○ Date Established: 2006  
○ Mandate:  To focus on a host of critical issues at the intersection of technological 
innovation and public policy —including economic issues related to innovation, 
productivity, and competitiveness,  technology issues in the areas of information 
technology and data, broadband telecommunications, advanced manufacturing, 
life sciences, agricultural biotechnology, and clean energy, and overarching 
policy tools related to public investment, regulation, ta xes, and trade.  
○ Focus Area:  AI, Digital Access, Digital Governance, and Digital Rights  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
91 ○ Members: 50 members including Adobe, Association for American Railroads 
(AAR), and the Walt Disney Company  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://globalnetworkinitiative.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: No government sector members.  
○ Notes: N/A 
 
37. Initiative Name: Internet Governance Forum (IGF)  
○ Date Established:  2006  
○ Mandate: To bring people together from va rious stakeholder groups as equals, 
in discussions on public policy issues relating to the Internet. While there is no 
negotiated outcome, the IGF informs and inspires those with policy -making 
power in both the public and private sectors.  
○ Focus Area:  Capa city Building, Digital Governance, and Policy Making  
○ Members:  The UN Secretary -General appoints a Multi -stakeholder Advisory 
Group (MAG) yearly  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability:  Aspirational  
○ Legacy:  N/A 
○ Source:  https://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/  
○ Gaps Identified: No enforceable structure.  
○ Notes:  IGF is funded through its own trust fund. The nature of the Trust Fund is 
such that it is voluntary and multi -donor driven, with varying contributions from 
Governments and non -governmental organisations from the technical 
community, the private sector and the civil society. The IGF Trust Fund covers 
the administrative and operational costs of the IGF Secretariat including 
personnel, fellowships, and meeting c osts (venues, interpretation, logistical 
costs, etc.), and funds the travel costs of MAG Members from developing 
countries.  
 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
92 38. Initiative Name:  The AFRINIC Government Working Group (AfGWG)  
○ Date Established: 2004  
○ Mandate: To strengthen the collaboration betwe en AFRINIC and African 
governments and regulators to promote sustainable and secure Internet 
development in Africa. To address collaboratively the general Internet 
governance challenges faced within the region, particularly those related to 
Internet number  resources.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance  
○ Members:  2,000 members including Africa on Cloud, the African Development 
Bank - AFDB, and Egypt  
○ Geographical Coverage: Africa  
○ Approval Mechanism:  Consensus  
○ Accountability: Aspirational  
○ Legacy: N/A  
○ Source:  https://afrinic.net/  
○ Gaps Identified: Largely focused on Internet service resources.  
○ Notes:  N/A 
 
39. Initiative Name: ICT4Peace  
○ Date Established: 2003  
○ Mandate: To save lives and protect human dignity through Information and 
Communication Technology. Since 20 03 ICT4Peace explores and champions 
the use of ICTs and new media for peaceful purposes, including for 
peacebuilding, crisis management and humanitarian operations. Since 2007 
ICT4Peace promotes cybersecurity and a peaceful cyberspace through inter alia 
international negotiations with governments, international organisations, 
companies and non -state actors.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Governance, Digital Rights, Human Rights, and Policy 
Making  
○ Members:  50 members including the African Union, the Cairo Regional Cent er 
for Training on Conflict Resolution and Peacekeeping in Africa (CCCPA), and 
Google  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
93 ○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://ict4peace.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
40. Initiative Name:  Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)  
○ Date Established: 1998  
○ Mandate: To keep the Internet secure, stable and interoperable. It promotes 
competition and develops policy on the Internet's unique identifiers. Through it s 
coordination role of the Internet's naming system, it has an important impact on 
the expansion and evolution of the Internet.  
○ Focus Area: Digital Cooperation and Tech Innovation  
○ Members: No members  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Majori ty 
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.icann.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: ICANN follows a multi -stakeholder model in which individuals, non -
commercial stakeholder groups, industry, and governments play important roles 
in its community -based, consensus -driven, policy -making approach.  
 
41. Initiative Name: World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)  
○ Date Established: 1994  
○ Mandate: To develop Web standards and lead the Web to its full potential.  
○ Focus Area:  Data Protection, Digital Access, and I nternet Security  
○ Members: 462 members including Amazon, Benetech, British Broadcasting 
Corporation (BBC), and the Center for Democracy and Technology  
○ Geographical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Unclear  
○ Accountability: Operational  
○ Legacy: N/A 
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
94 ○ Source:  https://www.w3.org/  
○ Gaps Identified: N/A 
○ Notes: N/A 
 
42. Initiative Name: Commonwealth Telecommunications Organization  
○ Date Established: 1967  
○ Mandate : To enable regulatory environments in key areas such as licensing, 
spectrum management, quality of ser vice and over -the-top operators, promote 
affordable universal and high -quality broadband connectivity via enabling policies 
and regulatory measures that facilitate the rapid rollout of broadband 
infrastructure, promote a culture of cybersecurity and effect ive cyber governance 
through the establishment of cybersecurity frameworks, standards and 
guidelines, promote the development and use of ICT applications for socio -
economic development e.g. e -governance, e -health, e -education and e -
agriculture, among other s, and ensure effective coordination of Commonwealth 
countries at international ICT conferences and meetings.  
○ Focus Area:  Policy Making and Digital Governance  
○ Members:  60 members including the Digital Bridge Institute, Facebook. And the 
United Kingdom  
○ Geog raphical Coverage: Global  
○ Approval Mechanism: Signatory  
○ Accountability: Enforceable  
○ Legacy: N/A 
○ Source: https://www.cto.int / 
○ Gaps Identified:  N/A 
○ Notes: It is a treaty . 
 
  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
95 Bibliography  
 
 
Africa Cybersecurity and Digital Rights Organization, http://acdro.org/about -us/ 
 
African Union Digital Transformation Strategy,   
https://au.int/sites/default/files/documents/38507 -doc-dts-english.pdf  
 
Aspirational Targets for 2030. https://www.itu.int/itu -d/meetings/statistics/umc2030/ . 
 
Bennett, A., Garson, M., Boakye, B., Beverton -Palmer, M., & Erzse, A. (2021, September). The 
Open Internet on the Brink: A Model to Save its Future . Tony Blair Institute for Global Change.  
https://institute.global/policy/open -internet -brink -model -save -its-future  
  
Better than Cash,  https://www.betterthancash.org/about  
 
Centre for International Governance Innovation, https://www.cigionline.org/  
 
China Innovation Project: A Guide to Und erstanding China's Next Wave of Innovation". Harvard 
University Newsletter.  https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/innovation/made -china -2025 -explained  
 
Cyber Peace Institute,  https://cyberpeaceinstitute.org/what -we-do 
  
Digital Cooperation Organization  https://dco.org/  
Fay, R. (2021). A Model for Global Governance of Platforms. Regulating Big Tech: Policy         
Responses to Digital Dominance , 255 –279. 
https://doi.o rg/10.1093/oso/9780197616093.003.0015  
“Global Findex Database 2017”, The World Bank,  https://globalfindex.worldbank.org   
Global Internet Forum to Co unter Terrorism,  https://gifct.org/  
  
Global Network Initiative,  https://globalnetworkinitiative.org/about -gni/ 
  
G20 Smart Cities Alliance,  https://globalsmartcitiesalliance.org/?page_id=107  
  
International Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers,  https://www.icann.org/  
  
International Telecommunications Unions (ITU), “Measuring Digital Development. Facts and  
Figures 2019” (Geneva, 2019).  
 
Internet Governance Forum,  http://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/tags/about  
  
Internet Society,  https://www.internetsociety.org/mission/  
  
InternetWorks,  https:// www.theinternet.works/about -2/ 
  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
96 John E. Katsos and Jason Miklian. “Overcoming Tech Exceptionalism: How to Improve Societal 
Impact by Technology Firms in Fragile and Conflict Settings.” 9 Jan. 2019,  
globalpolicyjournal.com . 
 
Kello, L. (2018). Cyber Threats. The Oxford Handbook on the United Nations .  
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803164.001.0001  
 
 
Kemp, Simon. “Digital 2021: Global Overview Report.” DataReportal – Global Digital Insights,  
Jan. 2021,  https://datareportal.com/reports/digital -2021 -global -overview -report . 
Kerry, C. F., Meltzer, J. P., Renda, A., Engler, A., & Fanni, R. (2021, October) . Strengthening 
International Cooperation on AI: Progress Report . Brookings. Retrieved from 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/strengthening -international -cooperation -on-ai/ 
“Microsoft at the UN” Microsoft Office of UN Affairs,  
https://www.microsoft.com/en -us/united -nations  
 
Non-Profit Cyber, https://nonprofitcyber.org/about/   
 
Nye, Jr. , J. S. (2014, May). The Regime Complex for Managing Global Cyber Activities. Centre 
for International Governance Innovation and the Royal Institute of International Affairs. 
https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/gcig_no30web.pdf  
 
Nye, Jr., J. S. (2022, February 15). The end of cyber -anarchy? How to Build a New Digital  
Order. Foreign Affairs. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/russian -federation/2021 -12-
14/end -cyber -anarchy  
Office of the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology. https://www.un.org/techenvoy/.  
Open Smart Register Platform (Open SRP)  https://smartregister.org/about/  
 
Pauwels, E. (2022, January). Multilateralism and the Rising Challenges of Global Cyber  
Insecurity. Konrad Adenauer Stiftung. Retrieved from 
https://www.kas.de/documents/273004/16929432/Multilateralism+and+the+Rising+Challenges+
of+Global+Cyber+Insecurity.pdf/240aaf80 -b738 -9ce9 -ff1d-
8472f2b7febb?version=1.0&t= 1645027889366  
 
Pauwels, E. (2019). The New Geopolitics of Converging Risks: The UN and Prevention in the  
Era of AI. United Nations University: Centre for Policy Research. Retrieved from 
https://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:7308/PauwelsAIGeopolitics.pdf  
 
“Press Release.” International Telecommunication Union, 30 Nov. 
2021, https://www.itu.int:443/en/mediacentre/Pages/PR -2021 -11-29-FactsFigures.aspx . 
 
Radunovic, Vladimir., Rüfenacht, David. (2016). Cybersecurity Competence Building Trends:  
Research Report.  Federal Departement of Foreign Affairs of Switzerland. Diplo Foundation.   
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
97  
Roberts, M. (2022, March 7). International Cooperation for a Better Digital Future . Institute for  
Global Change. https://institute.global/policy/internat ional -cooperation -better -digital -future  
  
Roser, Max, et al. “Internet.” Our World in Data, July 2015.  ourworldindata.org ,  
https://ourworldindata.org/internet . The Age of Digital Interdependence.  
  
SMART Africa,  https://smartafrica.org/who -we-are/ 
 
Socia l Media Exchange (SMEX), https://smex.org/who -we-are/ 
  
 
The African Declaration on Internet Rights and Freedoms,  
https://africaninternetrights.org/en/about  
  
The Consumer Technology Association,  https://www.cta.tech/who -we-are 
  
The Cybersecurity Coalition,  https://www.cybersecurityc oalition.org/  
  
The Digital Economy Partnership Agreement (DEPA),   
https://www.mti.gov.sg/Improving -Trade/Digital -Economy -Agreements/The -Digital -Economy -
Partnership -Agreement  
  
The Digital Trade and Data Governance Hub,  https://datagovhub.elliott.gwu.edu/about/  
  
The Internet & Jurisdiction Policy Network,  https://www.internetjurisdiction.net/about/mission  
  
The OECD Going Digital,  https://www.oecd.org/digital/going -digital -project/  
  
“The State of the Worlds Children (2017): Children in a Digital World”, UNICEF,  
https://www.unicef.org/media/48601/file  
  
Trust over IP Foundation,  https:/ /trustoverip.org/why -toip/overview/  
  
United Nations. (2015). Report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Development in the 
Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security, UN Group 
of Governmental Experts,  https://documents -dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N15/228/ 35/PDF/N1522835.pdf?OpenElement  
 
United Nations. (2019). The Age of Digital Interdependence: Report of the UN  
Secretary -General’s High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation . United Nations Secretary -
General’s High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation. 
https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/DigitalCooperation -report -for%20web.pdf  
 
United Nations. (2020). Road map for digital cooperation: implementation of the  
recommendations of the High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation: Report of the Secretary -
General (A/74/821). United Nations. https://daccess -ods.un.org/tmp/9803106.18877411.html  
 
United Nations. “Achieving Universal Meaningful Digital Connectivity: Setting a Baseline and  
Towards A Global Digital Governance Architecture: Mapping Pathways for Cooperation and Inclusion  
 
 
98 Targets for 2030. United Nations Office of the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology and 
International Telecommunications Union. https://www.itu.int/itu -d/meetings/statistics/wp -
content/uploads/sites/8/2022/04/UniversalMeaningfulDigitalConnectivi tyTargets2030_Backgrou
ndPaper.pdf  
 
United Nations. (2021). Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the 
context of international security (A/75/816). United Nations General Assembly. 
https://documents -dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N21/068/72/PDF/N2106872.pdf?OpenElement  
 
United Nations . (2021). Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 15 November 2021  
(A/Res/76/6). United N ations General Assembly. https://documents -dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N21/416/14/PDF/N2141614.pdf?OpenElement  
 
United Nations. (2021). Our Common Agen da: Report of the Secretary -General.  
United Nations.  https://www.un.org/en/un75/common -agenda  
 
United Nations. (2021). Report of the Group of Governmental Experts on Advancing responsible 
State behavior in cyberspace in the context of national security.  
https://doi.org/10.18356/9789210056700c072  
 
United Nations. United Nations Global Compact:  "Governance".  
https://www.unglobalcompact.org/what -is-gc/our -work/governance   
 
“What is GDPR, the EU’s new data protection law?” General Data Protection Regulation.  
https://gdpr.eu/what -is-gdpr/  
 
Yujie Xue and Minghe Hu. "China’s state -run World Internet Conference sees ‘quietest’ year  
ever amid coronavirus pandemic". South Morning China Post. Nov 24, 2020.  
https://www.scmp.com/tech/policy/article/3111154/chinas -state -run-world -internet -conference -
sees -quietest -year-ever-amid  
  
Zysman, John (2021, December 6) Towards a Digital Bretton Woods?  Project for Peaceful  
Competition: Global Cooperation on Digital Governance and the Geoeconomics of New 
Technologies in a Multi -polar World. https://www.cigionline.org/articles/toward -a-digital -bretton -
woods/  
 
“2021 G7 Digital and Technology Ministerial Declaration” G7 Digital and Technology Ministers,  
http:/ /www.g8.utoronto.ca/ict/2021 -digital -tech-declaration.html  
  