 
1  European Union contribution  to the Global Digital Compact  
March  2023  
INTRODUCTION  
The United Nations General Assembly has decided1 to hold a  ‘Summit of the Future’ in 2024, 
aimed, inter alia, to reinvigorate multilateralism, boost implementation of existing 
commitments, and agree on concrete solutions to challenges. The Global Digital Compact 
(GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT ) is expected to be one of the outcomes of the Summit as 
part of ‘Ou r Common Agenda’ representing the UN Secretary -General's vision on the future 
of global cooperation. The UN Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology coordinates the 
Global Digital Compact. The UN co -facilitators of the Global Digital Compact  are Rwanda 
and Sweden.  
The EU is to submit a contribution to the Global Digital Compact by a single  adopted 
document.  The European Union jointly prepared this document  in line with international 
instruments on  human rights and  in line with the European Declaration on Di gital Rights and 
Principles for the Digital Decade .  
The EU expects the Global Digital Compact to be anchored in respect for human rights and 
serve as a roadmap for a human -centric, global digital transformation. It should be ambitious  
and express a clear vision  that provides a framework for the increasing activity  across the UN 
family , and be anchored in robust  support for Human Rights. We expect the Global Digital 
Compact to support an internet that is open, stable, free, inclusive, global, interoperable,  
reliable, secure and sustainable . 
The Tech Envoy has a unique chance to improve coherence and coordination, as well as intra -
UN compliance  including particularly the ITU, UNESCO, UNIDO and the IGF . The EU 
considers that the Tech Envoy should play an advocacy role in the global debate on digital, in 
particular with the general public, putting the emphasis on the different options and scenarios 
that technology brings about. The Tech Envoy should also  uphold and improve the current 
multi -stakeholder model of internet governance, which is open, inclusive and decentralised. 
The independent and neutral position of the Tech Envoy, under the direct responsibility of the 
UN Secretary -General, can also ensur e that the promotion and protection of international 
human rights standards are mainstreamed through all the strands of action of the Roadmap’s 
and Common Agenda’s implementation, making clear that the priorities remain profoundly 
interconnected.  
  
                                                           
1  A/RES/76/307  

 
2 1. CONNECT ALL PEOPLE TO THE IN TERNET , INCLUDING ALL SCHOO LS 
Core Principles  
Some 2. 7 billion people in the world lack access to the Internet2 - the majority of whom are 
women and girls in low - and middle -income countries . Furthermore, two thirds of the world’s 
school -age children – or 1.3 billion children aged 3 to 17 years old – do not have an Internet 
connection in their homes.  
Digital connectivity is essential for working, learning and accessing basic services . Digital 
connectivity bring s people together, keep s us connected, independently of where we are.  
Broadband connectivity and satellite and cloud technology are a necessity in the transition 
towards a data -driven economy and society.3  
Information and communication  technologies (ICTs) can help accelerate progress towards 
every single one of the 17 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including 
SDGs on education and helping to build resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and 
sustainable industr ialization, and fostering innovation.  
Internet connectivity remains key to ensuring equitable access to the digital sphere for all, 
including women and young persons, to the digital sphere. Certain groups have specific needs , 
and therefore require special attention in this context. Connecting all people to the internet 
should result in accessible, affordable, inclusive, secure, safe and high quality access , via 
trusted networks to the open Internet . As such , indicators to monitor progress and relate d 
challenges should be developed for global use.  
Digital transformation  should be based on the right to interact digitally with public 
authorities  following a “mobile first” approach as primary authenticator giving  the choice to 
use – wherever practically feasible – mobile devices and mobile digital means to communicate 
and interact with public services.  Alternative options should be provided for users not able to 
use a mobile phone or a tablet.  
The COVID -19 pandemi c heightened the importance of access to secure and trustworthy 
digital infrastructures and technologies , underpinned by proper regulation  including in the 
field of health4. This includes the protection of users' rights online and the creation of fair, open 
and contestable online markets.  Net neutrality is a key issue to be maintained and protected . 
The digital transformation of education  could provide unique opportunities t o accelerate the 
achievement of inclusive and equitable quality education (SDG4) and lifelong learning 
opportunities for all. Quality education is a human right and should be regarded as a public 
good with particular focus on the most marginalised learners , teachers and parents. For this to 
happen the global digital divides , including the gender digital divide need to be overcome5. 
                                                           
2  ITU facts and figures 2022  
3  European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles  for the Digital Decade  
4  The European Union’s Digital Services Act  and Digital Markets Act  aim to create a safer digital space 
where the fundamental rights of users are protected and to establish a level playing field for businesses.  
5  Research by UNICEF and ITU has shown that whereas in high -income countries 87 % of children and 
youth have an internet connection at home, versus 6% in low -income countries.  
 
3 As digital skills often constitute a barrier to internet access , all pe rsons  should be able to 
acquire the basic and advanced digital skills, including media and information literacy. They 
need to become well -informed and responsible digital citizens and to be able fully , equally and 
meaningfully to participate in all spheres of the digital economy and society , and political life . 
Digital skills are best acquired in the classroom starting from elementary school and developed 
further on a constant basis throughout the lifetime.  Preventing and countering threats, such as 
online violence and harassment as well as cybersecurity awareness and hygiene must underpin 
the digital transformation of everyday activities. Every school should be connected to internet 
services and internet ser vices should be extended to households and individuals in order to 
provide additional avenues to education and lifelong learning.  
Key commitments  
Helping to achieve a sustainable digital transformation for everyone  in the EU , the EU has 
set out concrete t argets for digital transformation through the Digital Decade Policy 
Programme 2030 that evolves around four cardinal points: skills, digital transformation of 
businesses, secure and sustainable digital infrastructure, and digitalisation of public services , 
which all may serve as targets for the GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT . The success of digital 
transformation depends on the efficient combination of private investments and public funding 
instruments. Investments into digital infrastructure are necessary, especia lly in rural areas and 
outermost regions. Therefore, we encourage and support substantially investments in 5G and 
fibre6.  
To maximise the impact of public investment, a modern regulatory framework  is a 
precondition. The European Electronic Communications Code now includes essential pro -
investment rules, both in spectrum management and in access regulation. Elements of the EU 
regulatory framework ha ve been adopted in other parts of the world  that share the commitment 
to a human -centric  digital and green transformation . For example , the EU supports actions to 
develop regional roaming agreements and provide s technical assistance and expertise.  All these 
actions may serve as indications for the GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT . 
Everyone has the right to education, training and lifelong learning  and should be able to 
acquire basic and advanced digital skills. The EU's Digital Education Plan  offers good 
examples in this aspect. The EU promotes – and expects the Global Digital Compact to  promote 
- access to affordable, stable open, accessible, safe, secure and high-speed internet for higher 
education, including by investing in connecting schools . The EU commits to support efforts 
equipping education and training institutions with digital connectivity, infrastructure and tools , 
in line with the  2022 Transforming Education Summit and the GIGA initiative by 
UNICEF and ITU  to implement the policies, regulations, technologies and financing required 
to ensure that school connectivity is safe, sustainable and equitable.  The EU is also committed 
to enable  learners and te achers to acquire and share the necessary digital skills and 
competences to take an active part in the economy, society, and in democratic processes. 
Everyone should have  the possibility to adjust to changes brought by the digitalisation of work 
                                                           
6  To reach the 2030 targets, the EU will, inter alia , continue to support the deployment of Gigabit and 5G 
networks through the Connecting Europe Facility (CEF Digital) with a budget of €2.1 billion over 7 years. 
CEF Digital inter alia  supports 5G infrastructure for smart communities, including in rural are as. In 
addition, the Recovery and Resilience Facility dedicates more than €16 billion to connectivity, including 
Very High -Capacity Networks and 5G roll -out in remote areas. The EU is also leveraging connectivity 
investments through the new Cohesion Funds,  the EAFRD for regions and InvestEU.  
 
4 through up -skilling and re -skilling, in line with the European Declaration on Digital Rights and 
Principles for the Digital Decade . 
In line with its Global Gateway initiative, t he EU invest s in the digital world to promote 
connectivity, peace, and sustainable development and to protect human rights, democracy and 
the rule of law worldwide . It supports UN agencies and other organisations, inclu ding, 
UNESCO, the Council of Europe and others to ensure that human rights are applied both offline 
and online. They also underpin the support for the Declaration of the Futur e of the Internet , 
which has 70 signatories . The EU works actively in UN fora, including the Human Rights 
Council and the UN General Assembly Third Committee , to promote global cooperation on 
digital and human rights.  
As a result, including in light of  its own commitments, the EU considers  that the Global Digital 
Compact  can help achieve consensus  around  the following areas:  
 The importance of an Internet that is open, stable, free, inclusive, global, interoperable, 
reliable, secure and green7. Restrictions of and on the Internet threaten global and open 
cyberspace, as well as the rule of law, human rights and democracy – the core values of the 
European Union (EU). The EU expects the Global Digital Compact to  commit to ensuring 
access to excell ent connectivity for everyone and protecting a neutral and open Internet 
where content, services, and applications are not unjustifiably blocked or degraded.  
 The need to close the various digital divides , including digital gender gap s, foster ing access 
to digital, information and media education , and empower ing everyone, regardless of age, 
ethnic or social origin, disability, geographical location, sexual orientation and gender 
identity or any other status or condition . This is  with special regard to those in vulnerable 
situations so that they may participate confidently and safely in today’s digital society and 
economy. It needs to be ensured that all of the world’s people , including those in Least 
Developed Countries, Landlocked Developed Countries and Small Island Developing 
States , are able to benefit from the digital transformation and that the rights of persons in 
vulnerable situations are protected. The E U supports this with considerable resources , 
alongside sustainable, long -term human capacity bui lding . 
 Regulatory frameworks  that promote the deploy ment of  digital networks and 
infrastructures such as submarine and terrestrial fibre -optic cables, mobile wireless 
systems, space -based secure communication systems as well as cloud and data 
infrastructures, which together provide a basis for exchanges of data . The EU will work 
with partners  on these topics , and cooperat e in high performance computing, Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), and earth observation. The EU will prioritise underserved regi ons, 
countries and populations, including those  affected by aggressive and hostile actions , such 
as Ukraine, supporting the process of rebuilding ICT infrastructure and connection s and 
strengthening secure and trusted digital connections within them and between Europe and 
the world.  
 The need to minimize the environmental footprint  of digital infrastructure, the internet 
and digital technologies, by promoting green data centres and supporting the deploy ment 
of submarine telecom cables8 equipped with ocean monitoring sensors that will be put at 
                                                           
7  The twin green & digital transition:  How sustainable digital technologies could enable a carbon -neutral 
EU by 2050   
8  Such as the BELLA Programme between Latin America and Europe or the planned Far North Fiber, pan -
arctic submarine cable system, connecting Europe, North America and Asia via  the Northwest Passage.  
 
5 the service of science (Oceanography, Geophysics, etc.) as well as of the population by 
contributing to sustainability and mitigating  the impac t of natural disasters. The EU will 
ensure that the digital transformation is supported by sufficient clean energy. Global 
Gateway investments  are used to adapt to the needs and strategic interests of different 
regions, while remaining values -driven.  
Key EU documents  
- European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade  
- Decision (EU) 2022/2481 establishing the Digital Decade Policy Programme 2030  
- Declaration for the Future of the Internet  
- Global Gateway Joint Communication  
- DigComp 2.2  
- Digital Education Action Plan (2021 -2027) 
- Digital transformation strategy for Africa 2020 -2030 .  
- European Green Digital Coalition  
- EU Action Plan for Human Rights and Democracy 2020 -2024  
- Multiannual work programme for 2021 -2025 - Connecting Europe Facility – Digital     
  
 
6 2. AVOID INTERNET FRAGME NTATION  
Core principles  
The Internet has been conceived and developed as a single, global, decentralised network of 
networks. Under this model, it has helped connecting people and organisations worldwide and 
contributed to shape the current economic and social context.  All parties should work to ensure 
that the Internet continues to evolve as an open network of networks , a single interconnected 
communication system for all of humanity.  
The EU shares a vision of the Internet  that is open, stable, free,  inclusive, global,  
interoperable, reliable, secure  and green  and puts humans and their rights at the centre of digital 
transformation. The concrete principles to which the EU adheres can be found in the 
Declaration on European Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade  and the 
Declaration  for the Future of the Internet . 
The EU vision is:  
 To promote the evolution of the current model of the Internet inside the multi -stakeholder 
and inclusive institutions that develop, deploy, and manage the protocols, standards and  
core infrastructures of the internet. This will avoid fragmentation on a technical level.  
 To protect and fortify the multi -stakeholder ecosystem of Internet governance and keep 
fundamentals of the Internet out of geopolitics. The EU is committed to engagi ng in 
existing global and regional multi -stakeholder fora (such as the Internet Governance 
Forum) to discuss and negotiate internet governance issues.  This will avoid fragmentation 
of the governance of the internet.  
 To promote a human -centric approach to t he Internet. The EU pays specific attention to 
Digital markets, which need to be open, fair and contestable. The EU also promotes a global 
digital transition based on affordable, inclusive and reliable access, human rights and 
fundamental freedoms.  
 To avoi d commercial or economic fragmentation, which could have an impact on the 
Internet architecture.  
 To ensure that national and international legislation and government practices affecting the 
internet are designed to promote and protect human rights. This wi ll avoid user experience 
fragmentation.  
Key commitments  
Reflecting its own commitments, the EU considers  that the Global Digital Compact  should 
promote the following  commitments , which are required to av oid the fragmen tation  of the 
Internet : 
 Participat ion in and strengthen ing of  the multi -stakeholder and inclusive system of Internet 
governance, including the development, deployment, and management of its main technical 
protocols and other related standards and protocols.  
 Given its place as the premier inde pendent forum for multistakeholder input, the EU 
supports the Internet Governance Forum  (IGF)  and its potential to grow into an always 
 
7 more incisive, inclusive, and sustainable model. The EU also supports the IGF provision of 
multistakeholder input into th e Global Digital Compact .  
 Preserve the technical infrastructure essential to the general availability and integrity of the 
Internet , including by refraining from internet shutdow ns or degrading internet access.  
 Put people at the centre of digital transformation by strengthening the democratic and 
participatory framework9, ensuring the protection of and respect for human rights online 
and offline, fostering responsible and diligent action by all digital actors pub lic and private,  
supporting local data and technological ownership as well technological capacity building  
for a safe and secure digital environment. The EU will actively promote the human -centric 
centric and green vision of digital transformation, includi ng globally.  
 Continue to protect and promote human rights and fundamental freedom online by 
establishing robust safeguards and defining responsibilities for platforms, especially for 
very large online platforms . 
 
Key EU documents  
- European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade  
- Digital Service Act  
- Digital Markets Act  
- Council Conclusio ns on EU Digital Diplomacy  
- NIS2 Directive  
  
                                                           
9  Including a strong judiciary, respect of rule of law, developing strong institutions.  
 
8 3. PROTECT DATA  
Core Principles  
As explained in the European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles  for the Digital 
Decade , everyone should have access to safe, secure and privacy -protective digital 
technologies, products and services. Th is implies protecting the interests and rights of people, 
businesses and public institutions against cybercrime, including cyberattacks and data 
breaches, and confronting those that seek to undermine the security of our online environment. 
This includes protecting digital identity from identity theft or manipulation.  Protection of 
personal data in the digital domain in the EU is governed by the EU General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) , which is echoed in similar regulations in the EU Neighbourhood, Africa, 
Asia and in the Americas. Concerning other types of data, the proposal for an EU Data Act  will 
introduce mandatory safeguards to protect non -personal data of EU customers held on cloud 
infrastructures against unlawful access by non -EU/EEA authorities.  
The Europea n data governance framework – built on the basis of the European strategy for data 
-  aims at promoting and protecting human rights and democratic values,  and the right to 
privacy,  which is a precondition in all matters related to data access, sharing and use and to 
data governance, including those related to non -personal data.  The principles empower  
individuals and companies with respect to the data they contribute to produce, both  personal 
and non -personal. They control such data and have the right to decide who can access them 
and for what purposes. Individuals’ and companies’ sensitive data  should be protected from 
unlawful access and transfer requests. Data quality is also a key  issue in several areas such as 
health.  Those who seek to undermine security online or to promote violence , harassment  and 
hatred through digital means  need to be held accountable  in ways that adhere to the principles 
of legality, necessity and proportionality . It is key to ensure the use of quality data and that data 
collection and methods of use and analysis are inclusive, gender -responsive, ensuring 
confidentiality and without r isk or harm for whose data is collected, and do not reproduce 
gender bias, stereotypes and discriminatory social norms.  
The EU remains committed to the concept of data free flow with trust . We believe that there 
is a need to allow the free flow of data wit h confidence in order to foster innovation and 
business opportunities across all sectors, while at the same time recognizing the need for 
governments to retain the ability to regulate data flows, both for personal and non -personal 
data, and to address curr ent and future challenges related to cross -border data flows.  The EU 
will work towards ensuring that its businesses can benefit from the international free flow of 
data in full compliance with EU data protection rules and other public policy objectives, 
including public security and public order. In particular, the EU will continue to address 
unjustified obstacles to data flows while preserving its regulatory autonomy in the area of data 
protection and privacy.  
Key commitments  
The EU promotes internationall y a data governance model , based on a human -centric and 
values -based approach and taking into account the importance of cross -border data flows for 
EU businesses, in order to develop digital partnerships and to organise international data flows 
by guarante eing the outmost respect and promotion for human rights and values.  
 
9 The EU therefore expects the Global Digital Compact  to have a strong focus on the protection  
of personal and non -personal data. 
 While the GDPR  provides a set of standardized data protection laws throughout the EU , an 
important component of privacy and human rights law, the EU will contribute to the 
creation of a legal framework in which data of EU citizens and companies are protected, 
also in the context of international data trans fers. The shielding provisions established 
in the Data Governance Act for sensitive publicly held non -personal data, and proposed in 
the Data Act also for cloud and edge services, are available as examples.  
 Concerning other types of data, the proposal for  an EU Data Act  will introduce mandatory 
safeguards to protect non -personal data of EU customers held on cloud infrastructures 
against unlawful access by non -EU/EEAS authorities. The proposal will ensure fairness in 
the data economy, stimulate competitiveness of European  business and open opportunities 
for data -driven innovation.   
 The EU helps  develop regulatory frameworks that prevent the establishment of a data -
extractive model globally, and in particular in emerging markets, and  is ready to support 
the development  of such frameworks .  
 
Key EU documents  
- European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade  
- Global Gateway Joint Communication  
- EU Data Act  
- EU Data Governance Act : 
- EU General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR)  
- Data Quality Framework for EU medicines regulation  
- Good practice guide for the use of the Metadata Catalogue of Real -World Data Sources  
- European Data Strategy  
  
 
10 4. APPLY HUMAN RIGHTS ONLINE  
Core principles  
Digital technologies have vastly improved the way we communicate, engage and consume and 
contribute to the respect and enjoyment of human rights, including, freedom of opinion and 
expression, freedom of association and assembly, freedom of religion or belief and access to 
trustworthy information. New technologies have a key role in facilitating the documentation of  
violations of international  human rights and humanitarian law vi olations as well as war crimes. 
Emerging new technologies can also be instrumental in facilitating access to health, 
employment, information, participation, education and many other areas. However, these 
technologies can also have a negative impact, such a s more widely spreading disinformation 
and hate speech, enabling new forms of violence, violations and abuses of the right to privacy, 
facilitating access to specific illegal content including child sexual abuse and exploitation, 
widespread surveillance li miting freedom of expression and reducing civil society space, 
reinforcing discrimination and structural inequalities.  
Human rights apply both online and offline. The same rights that humans enjoy offline, civil 
and political rights, as well as, economic,  social or cultural rights, must also be promoted and 
protected online.  
Digital technologies must be human -centred and human rights compliant. New technologies 
can contribute significantly to the protection and promotion of human rights, democracy and 
gend er equality including by making public participation easier and more effective, increasing 
access to public services, facilitating the documentation of violations and abuses of human 
rights, and fostering online activism.  
A human rights -based approach is a t the core of the EU´s human -centric vision for the 
technological transformation, which is based on the promotion and protection of the rule of 
law, human rights and democracy. A human rights -based approach to the whole life -cycle – 
i.e. the design, develo pment, deployment evaluation and use – of digital technologies puts 
human rights at the centre of all considerations and actions related to existing and emerging 
challenges.  
To affirm its commitment to applying human rights online, the European Union adop ted new 
standard -setting rules that aim to create a safer and more trustworthy online space for users and 
consumers. The Digital Services Act (DSA) provides users with new tools to better exert their 
rights, and defines clear responsibilities and obligatio ns for online platforms. For example, very 
large online platforms will now be obliged to assess and mitigate the risks posed by their 
systems, including to the protection of fundamental rights, public interests, public health and 
safety, and to subject the ir assessments and measures to an independent audit.  
In establishing rules and obligations, the DSA has a particular focus on addressing the impact 
of digital technologies on persons in vulnerable situations, and on ensuring  gender equality  and 
non-discrimination.  In addition, special attention needs to be paid to  the rights of  children and 
youth.    
The DSA seeks to enhance freedom of expression online, make marketplaces safer and address 
illegal content and societal ri sks to the benefit of both consumers and companies, ensuring that 
we do not have to face a trade -off between the safety of our citizens and the freedom of 
 
11 expression online. Under the DSA, companies providing digital services are responsible for 
ensuring u sers’ safety and trust and guaranteeing respect for human rights in a transparent 
manner. At the same time, the DSA prohibits, EU governments from forcing digital services to 
engage in general monitoring. These new rules will complement and harmonise the w ork done 
to tackle different types of illegal content.  
Children face particular issues online, including exposure to violence and harm, inter alia 
sexual exploitation and abuse, technology -facilitated solicitation, cyberbullying, cyber 
harassment, cyber p rocuring, human trafficking, information manipulation and interference, as 
well as breach of their right to privacy and their right to be forgotten.  Children have the 
fundamental right to have their best interests assessed and taken into account as a prima ry 
consideration in all decision and actions that affect them. The fight against child sexual abuse 
is of high priority for the European Union. This crime knows no borders and requires a 
comprehensive, multi -stakeholder and global approach and effective to ols. Targeted and robust 
prevention plays a key role in protecting children against child sexual abuse and sexual 
exploitation.  The provisions on the protection of minors in the DSA reaffirm that a safer and 
better digital environment for children and young people is a key priority for the European 
Union. The recently updated EU Better Internet for Kids strategy (BIK+) contributes to the 
implementation of the regulatory framework, in particular the DSA.  
The European Commission uses dedicated funding to support,  effective prevention initiatives 
targeting perpetrators and persons at elevated risk of committing  offences against children, 
including online . It also supports  technical tools for law enforcement to develop the capabilities 
of units dedicated to investigating crimes of child sexual abuse and exploitation more 
efficiently  while fully guaranteeing privacy and the protection of personal data . At the global 
level, the Commission works closely with a number of key stakeholders, in particular the 
WeProtect  Global Alliance to eradicate online child sexual abuse (WPGA), to contribute to the 
development of global standards to protect children from these crimes and promote awareness 
and multi -stakeholder cooperation . 
While technological change and digitalisation can accelerate progress for gender equality and 
the empowerment of all women and girls, they can also exacerbate vulnerability, existing 
inequalities, gender stereotypes and discriminatory social norms with serious risks and 
implications for women and girls in particular. Incitement to hatred and violence, and all forms 
of online sexual and gender -based violence as well as disinformation are spreading, often 
disproportionately affecting women and girls. This is an opportune moment for the 
international community to make bold commitments to step up action at the national, regional 
and international levels to ensure that innovation, technological change and digital education 
will accelerate gender equality, whil st preventing, mitigating and managing all potential 
harmful impacts.  
There is a pressing need for the world to present a united front and commit to an open, stable, 
free, global, inclusive, interoperable, reliable, secure, and green  Internet. This should be 
accompanied by efforts to ensure a safer and more transparent digital environment, where 
human rights are protected and no one is discriminated against based on sex, race, ethnic, 
national or social origin, religion or belief, political or any other opi nion, disability, age, sexual 
orientation  and gender identity  or any other ground.  
 
12 The European Union is firmly committed to a vision of the Internet as a safe and trusted space 
for everyone, where the fundamental freedoms and human rights we promote , protect , enjoy 
and apply  offline , are also protected , promoted enjoyed and applied online. The EU believes 
that digital technologies have the potential to promote and reinforce democracy, peace and 
human rights, as described in the Universal Declaration o f Human Rights, as well as the 
principles of the rule of law, legitimate purpose, non -arbitrariness, effective oversight , and 
transparency.  
While necessary and appropriate regulation is incumbent on governments in accordance with 
their human rights obligat ions, addressing the impact of digital technologies on human rights 
requires a multi -stakeholder approach to policy -making, involving national authorities, 
national human rights institutions, academia, civil society, human rights defenders, journalists, 
international and regional organizations and the private sector.  
The Terrorist Content Online (TCO) Regulation, which entered into application on 7 June 
2022, has also uniform rules to ensure terrorist content aimed at spreading propaganda, 
providing instru ctions, recruiting followers, and facilitating and directing terrorist activities, is 
removed within one hour after receiving a removal order by an EU Member State. In particular, 
it regulates the duties of care to be applied by hosting service providers ( HSPs) as well as the 
measures to be in place on the part of Member State’ authorities in order to identify and ensure 
the quick removal of terrorist content online and to facilitate cooperation between Member 
States and Europol.  
Key commitments  
The EU expect s the Global Digital Compact to  promote a human rights -based approach to the 
whole cycle of digital technologies – including design, development, deployment , evaluation  
and use – as part of a coherent narrative of the human -centric vision of the digi tal 
transformation, including in international standard -setting processes.  The EU is committed , 
and expect the Global Digital Compact to  commit to ensuring a safe, secure and fair online 
environment, that facilitates innovation and in which human rights ar e protected and promoted, 
and responsibilities of platforms, especially very large online platforms, are well defined.  
Co-regulation of the digital space should reinforce the rule of law that is essential to well -
functioning democracies. Through the combin ed regulatory package of the Digital Services 
Act (DSA) and the Digital Markets Act (DMA), the European Union is taking a systemic 
approach to set global standards for online platform regulation, which optimises the balancing 
of the different human rights online . The EU support s the work done on this by UNESCO and 
would welcome its inclusion  in the GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT . Anti-corruption, media 
and information literacy, election integrity and other capacity -building efforts are additional 
elements required to build resilient societies.  
The EU is committed to, and expect s the Global Digital Compact  to support an online 
environment where people are safe from information manipulation, online sexual and gender -
based violence and harassment and interference, incl uding hate speech and other forms of 
harmful content, such as Child Sexual Abuse Material (CSAM) and/or disinformation.  The 
Global Digital Compact should  equally address the problems of Terrorist Content Online , 
including removal of online content.  
 
13 In line with the EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy 2020 -2024 , promoting 
human rights and democracy in the use of digital te chnologies, including artificial intelligence, 
is one of the main priorities of EU external human rights policy. The EU expect s the Global 
Digital Compact to  promote the rights to privacy and data protection, address ing arbitrary and 
mass surveillance and actively combat ing internet shutdowns  (and misuse of the internet, 
e.g. for arbitrary surveillance of civil society actors and spaces) , online censorship, hate 
speech online, online sexual and gender -based violence, information manipulation and 
interferenc e, including disinformation and cybercrime, in full compliance with international 
human rights law. Through its policies to support human rights defenders  (HRDs) , the EU will 
continue to fund trainings in digital security for civil society , journalists  and human rights 
defenders and to fund emergency measures to protect HRDs in the online sphere. The EU will 
continue to pay particular attention to categories of HRDs particularly at risk such as women 
human rights defenders, LGBTI rights defenders, and de fenders of land, environmental and 
indigenous peoples ’ rights.  
During the last decade, several EU laws have been adopted in different areas to make the EU 
more digitally accessible for persons with disabilities, among others the Web Accessibility 
Directiv e, which requires websites and mobile applications of public sector bodies to be 
digitally accessible, the European Accessibility Act covering also many private sector products 
and services, and the European Communications Code covering accessible emergenc y 
communications. It should be noted that while digital accessibility features are essential for 
some, they are often useful for all users.  
With the European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade , 
the European Union spells out how values and human rights should be applied in the online 
world . The Declaration refers to EU law, from the Treaties to the Charter of Fundamental rights 
but also the case law of the Court of Justice. It builds on the experience of the European Pillar 
of Social Rights . This vision , which can be reflected in the GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT , 
includes: puttin g people at the centre of the digital transformation; underlying solidarity and 
inclusion; restating the importance of freedom of choice; participation in the digital public 
space; safety, security and empowerment; and sustainability.  
These principles should accompany people in their everyday life: accessible, affordable and 
high-speed digital connectivity everywhere and for everybody, well -equipped classrooms and 
digitally skilled teachers, seamless access to public services, a safe di gital environment for 
everyone , disconnecting after working hours, obtaining easy -to-understand information on the 
environmental impact of our digital products, controlling how their personal data are used and 
with whom they are shared.  to combat all forms  of discrimination, with a specific attention to 
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination, including on grounds of sex, race, ethnic or 
social origin, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, disability, age, sexual orientation 
and gend er identity.  
At international level, this commitment to a human rights -based approach has taken the form 
of the Declaration for the Future of the Internet (DFI) , which promotes an affirmative, 
positive and strategic agenda for a free, open, global, intero perable, reliable, and secure 
Internet, and commits to strengthen our work to combat violence online. The DFI convincingly 
builds on universally agreed digital rights and principles as a standard for the entire world.  
 
 
14 Key EU documents  
- European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles for the Digital Decade  
- Digital Services Act  
- Digital Markets Act  
- EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy   
  
 
15 5. INTRODUCE ACCOUNTABIL ITY CRITERIA FOR DIS CRIMINATION AND MISL EADING 
CONTENT  
Core principles  
Digital ecosystems should be based on transparency and ensure free flow and wide 
availability of h igh-quality and pluralistic information , empowering citizens against 
information manipulation and interference, including disinformation, discrimination  online 
gender -based violence and harassment  and misleading content online, while ensuring an open, 
stable, free, global, inclusive, interoperable, reliable, secure, and green Internet  and fully 
respecting human rights, democracy and the rule of law . The recent Declaration on Digital 
Rights and Principles recalls most relevant rights in this respec t. 
Everyone, regardless of their age, gender, abilities, condition, or geographical location, has a 
right to benefit fully from safe, secure and fair online environment , where human rights are 
protected  and promoted , and responsibilities of government, platforms and other tech actors 
are well defined . The transparency regarding the origin of information  and the way it is 
produced, sponsored, used, disseminated and targeted should be improved.  
Citizens should be empowered to make their own, informed choi ces online , based on access 
to diverse, transparent, reliable and easily accessible information, and equipped with 
information and media literacy skills  they need to defend themselves against 
discriminatory, violent, false or misleading content , manipulate d information and 
disinformation, which used to violate and erode human rights, deepen inequalities, spread 
dangerous misinformation and fuel discrimination, xenophobia , misogyny  and racism.  
Stakeholders should address challenges presented by online disinformation , information 
manipulation and interference, which can erode public trust in democratic processes and 
institutions, as well as the citizens’ exercise of their sovereign power free of foreign 
interference and incite discrimination, intolerance  and violence , including online gender -based 
violence and harassment . Any limitations to freedom of expression must remain within strictly 
defined parameters flowing from international human rights law, such as legality/legitimate 
interest, necessity and p roportionality.  
Inclusive solutions should be promoted through awareness -raising, media and information 
literacy, broad stakeholder involvement and the cooperation of public authorities, platforms, 
media and other online actors, as well as civil society. I n order to make governmental services 
more inclusive and more accessible, the “mobile first” approach should be applied where 
possible  supplemented by alternative authentication options for users not able to use a mobile 
phone or a tablet . 
Key commi tments  
Reflecting its own commitments, the EU considers  that the Global Digital Compact  should 
promote the following principles and actions  to ensure transparency and accountability : 
 Strengthen multilateral and multi -stakeholder engagement  to tackle discriminatory 
content as well as false and misleading content at all levels, notably within the United 
Nations and with other international and regional organisations, to advocate transparent and 
 
16 accountable content governance frameworks that protect free dom of expression  and 
enhance the availability of accurate and reliable information in the public sphere , while 
fully respecting human rights, democracy and the rule of law.  
 Strengthen cooperation of public authorities’, platforms and other tech actors media 
and civil society  to protect individuals against information manipulation and interference, 
including disinformation and other forms of harmful content, prevent the rise of hatred 
online, by developing counter -narratives and measures promoting non -discrimination, 
tolerance and respect, including through awareness -raising and public communication 
activities . , as well as addressing the root causes of inequalities, such as discriminatory 
structures, social norms and gender stereotypes.  
 Strengthen cooper ation of public authorities’, platforms and other tech actors , media 
and civil society  to combat gendered disinformation, the spread of gendered 
misinformation and online sexual and gender -based violence and harassment.  
 Develop international principles  on information manipulation and interference, 
including disinformation (through, for example, codes of practices) with clear 
commitments and specific measures, allowing for stronger joint action and accountability, 
subject to regular monitoring. Signatories c ould voluntarily commit to take action in several 
domains, such as demonetising the dissemination of disinformation; ensuring the 
transparency of political advertising; algorithmic transparency, empowering users to assess 
the reliability of sources of onli ne content; enhancing the integration of fact -checking by 
platforms in their services; cooperation with fact -checkers; and providing researchers better 
access to data.  
 Promote adequate changes in platforms' conduct, aimed at a more accountable 
information ecosystem , with increased transparency, enhanced fact -checking capabilities 
and collective knowledge on information manipulation and interference, including 
disinformation and discrimination online, and the use of new technologies to improve the 
way inform ation is produced and disseminated online. Platforms should mitigate the risks 
stemming from the use of their services, protect freedom of expression and promote free 
democratic debate online  and be held accountable for doing so.  
 Support cooperation and knowledge sharing on standard  setting, policy -making and 
policy implementation, encourage information sharing to help governmental and non -
governmental stakeholders address information manipulation and interference, including 
disinformation and other harmf ul content through human rights compatible policies.  
 Share best practices in the UN context , such as some of those resulting from the EU 
Digital Services Act (DSA), which aims to create a transparent and safe online space to 
safeguard users against illega l content, online discrimination, and cyber incidents . The 
DSA is expected to facilitate  innovation by digital businesses in the online environment 
whilst ensuring the protection of fundamental rights, including the principle of consumer 
protection.  
 Promo te digital literacy and life -long development of digital competences , crucial to 
reinforce the resilience of our societies to information manipulation and interference, 
including disinformation and raise awareness of potential issues related to ethics, dat a 
protection and privacy, rights  of the child , discrimination and bias, including gender bias 
and disability and ethnic and racial discrimination.  
 Support reliable sources of information  and quality journalism. Public authorities, 
platforms, media and other online actors as well as civil society should foster exposure to 
 
17 diverse cultural and multilingual, information, and media content in order to contribute to 
pluralistic public discourse, strengthen inclusion, and bolster resilience to information 
manipulation and interference, including disinformation.  
 Support media freedom and protect/ensure journalists’ safety online. Freedom of 
expression and the right not to be subjected to hate speech, incitement to viole nce etc. as 
for example reflected in The Rabat Plan of Action and the Santa Clara Principles  need to 
be observed respecting international human rights standards.  
 Public authorities and private actors should refrain from using the Internet to undermine 
the democratic electoral infrastructure, elections and political processes , including 
through covert information manipulation campaigns.  
 Safeguard global security  in the context of countering foreign information manipulation 
and interference (FIMI), including state -sponsored interference, as well as combatting 
violence and hate speech, including through support for the Paris and Christchurch Calls.  
 Foster greater e xposure to diverse quality cultural and multilingual content , 
information, and news online. Exposure to diverse content online should contribute to 
pluralistic public discourse, foster greater social and digital inclusion within society, bolster 
resilience  to information manipulation and interference, including disinformation, and 
increase inclusive participation in democratic processes.  
Key EU documents  
- Council Conclu sions on EU Digital Diplomacy  18 July 2022  
- European Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles  for the Digital Decade  
- Digital Services Act   
- Communication on ‘ tackling online disinformation: a European approach ’ (2018)  
- Action plan on disinformation   
- The EU Code of conduct on countering illegal hate speech online  (2018):  
- European Democracy Action Plan   
- The Strengthened EU Code of Practice on Disinformation  (16 June 2022)  
- Council Conclusions on Fore ign Information Manipulation and Interference  (FIMI)  
  
 
18 6. PROMOTE REGULATION OF  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIG ENCE  
Core principles  
In 2018, the global business value derived from Artificial Intelligence (AI) amounted to USD  
1.2 trillion. Post -Covid, the use of AI will likely generate three times that : namely  USD 4 
trillion benefit for global markets10.  
As AI is expanding, the European Union is guided  by a human -centric and  pro-innovation 
approach,  to AI based on fundamental rights, and Union values such as democracy and  
the rule of law , as enshrined recently in the Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles . 
For the EU, fundamental rights form the bedrock and are at the centre of all considerations 
related to existing and emerging challenges and for all regulations and  measures concerning 
the entire lifecycle of new and emerging technologies. Trust and transparency in AI systems 
are crucial  for their acceptance and sustainability. Human oversight, transparency , risk 
management  are th e core principles by which to regulat e tech business models and their 
applications.  
From the beginning, the European Commission’s approach to AI has had the twin objective of 
creating ecosystems of excellence and trust to promote the development and uptake of AI while 
addressing the risks associated with certain uses of this technology.  The EU Coordinated Plan 
on AI  translated these objectives into a set of concrete actions to be implemented by the 
Commission and Member States.  The EU wants AI to be trustworthy, transparent and 
accountable  so that people can trust that the technology is developed , deployed and used in a 
way which meets a high level of protection of public interests, such as health , safety and the 
protection of fundamental rights. The Artificial Intelligence Act  will make su re that 
Europeans can trust what AI has to offer. Proportionate and flexible rules address the specific 
risks posed by AI systems, will foster innovation and create legal certainty. The new rules will 
be applied directly in the same way across all Member S tates based, on a future -proof definition 
of AI, and a risk -based approach: systems considered high -risk will have to comply with a 
number of requirements before being put or being used in the EU market. The AI Act is 
designed to be future -proof : it will i nclude flexible mechanisms that allow the high -risk use 
cases to be dynamically adapted as the technology evolves. On 28 September 2022, the 
Commission delivered on the objectives of the White Paper and on the European Parliament’s 
request with the Proposa l for an Artificial Intelligence Liability Directive (AILD).  
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become an area of strategic importance and a key driver of 
economic progress, hence women have to be part of its development as researchers, 
programmers and users . While AI can bring solutions to many societal challenges, it risks 
intensifying inequalities  and discrimination . Algorithms and related machine -learning, if not 
transparent and robust enough, risk repeating, amplifying or contributing to unfair biases that 
programmers may not be aware of or that are the result of specific data selection.  
Key commitments  
In April 2021 the European Commission presented a proposal11 for a legal framework for AI 
(AI Act). The Commission proposal puts forward rules for the de velopment, placing on the 
                                                           
10  Roadmap for Digital Cooperation, June 2020, Report of the Secretary -General UN.  
11  It is likely to be adopted approximatively by the end of 2023 - beginning of 2024  
 
19 market and use of AI systems in the EU following a proportionate risk -based approach. I t 
adopts the following topography : 
 A limited set of uses of AI that contravene fundamental values or violate fundamental rights 
are proposed to  be prohibited : AI systems that distort a person’s behaviour through 
subliminal techniques or by exploiting specific vulnerabilities in ways that cause or are 
likely to cause physical or psychological harm; general social scoring  carried out by public 
authorities ; “real -life” remote biometric identification in public accessible spaces for law 
enforcement purposes (with some targeted exceptions).  
 High -risk AI systems , posing significant risks to fundamental rights or safety,  must 
comply with certain req uirements which include the use of high -quality datasets (in order 
to avoid bias and  unlawful  discrimination), appropriate documentation and information 
obligations to enhance traceability, transparency, the design and implementation of 
appropriate human o versight measures, and the achievement of the highest standards in 
terms of robustness, safety, cybersecurity and accuracy.  
 Transparency obligations are introduced for certain AI systems:  when using AI 
systems such as chatbots, deepfakes, emotion recognition or biometric categorisation 
systems, users should be aware that they are interacting with a machine so they can take an 
informed decision to continue or step back.  
 For low-risk AI systems , codes of conducts are encouraged and could be facilitat ed by the 
European Commission and the Member States.  
In addition, the Digital Services Act  provides for transparency obligations as regards the terms 
and conditions of intermediary services, algorithms and recommender systems used by online 
platforms. Ver y large online platforms are requested to assess the systemic risks stemming 
from the functioning of their services and take measures against such risks, including adapting 
their algorithms, content moderation or recommender systems. The Digital Services A ct also 
provides for the obligation for very large online platforms to give access to their data, including 
algorithmic systems, to Member States and to researchers.  
The EU will continue promoting a , human -centric  and balanced approach to AI within the 
Single Market and globally , covering  the whole life -cycle of digital technologies - including 
design, development, deployment , evaluation  and use. It will also continue cooperation at the 
international level, bilaterally and within the framework of multilat eral fora to achieve better 
coordination, collaboration and governance. The EU expects this approach to be reflected in 
the Global Digital Compact . 
In such fora, the EU will actively engage and participate in AI discussions , including on 
research and innov ation cooperation  as well as competitiveness . It strongly believes that 
ethically applied AI and technology at large can be used to help achieve the Paris Climate 
agreement  and the  Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , in line with  UNESCO’s 
Recommendation on the Ethics of AI . Innovative and tested digital solutions may promote 
efficiency of public administration, public participation in decision -making, and creation of 
new economic opportunities.  
Regarding emerging challenges relate d to lethal autonomous weapons systems (LAWS), the 
EU emphasises that human beings must make the decisions with regard to the use of lethal 
force, exert control over weapons systems that they use and remain accountable for decisions 
 
20 over the use of force i n order to ensure compliance with International Law, in particular 
International Humanitarian Law.  The EU expects these issues on LAWS  to be reflected in the 
Global Digital Compact – in line also with the UNESCO Recommendations on the ethics of AI.  
The EU and UNESCO Member States have signed up to the UNESCO recommendati ons on 
ethics of artificial intelligence  and held the Global Forum on the Ethics of the Artificial 
Intelligence in Prague on 13 December 2022. The EU , the Council of Europe member states 
and third countries sharing the same values are currently discussing a Council of Europe 
Convention on artificial intelligence based on the Council of Europe’s standards on human 
rights, democracy and the rule of law, and conducive to innovation, in accordance with the 
relevant decisions of the Committee of Ministers12.   
Key EU documents  
- European Commission (2022): European  Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles  for 
the Digital Decade  
- United Nations (202 1) Our Common Agenda report  (commitment No 7 ‘ Improve digital 
cooperation ’) 
- European Commission (2021): Proposal for a regulation laying down harmonised rules on 
artificial intelligence COM(2021) 206 final  
- European C ommission (2021): Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence 2021 Review 
COM(2021) 205 final  
- European Commission (2020): White Paper on artificial intelligence – A European 
approach to excellence and trust (COM(2020) 65 final)  
- EU High -Level Expert Group on AI (2019): Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI  
- European Commission (2018): Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence (COM(2018) 
795 final)  
- Council Decision (EU) 2022/2349: Council Decision authorising the opening of 
negotiations on behalf of the European Union for a Council of Europe convention on 
artificial intelligence , human rights, democracy and the rule of law  
- European Commission (2018): Communication on AI for Europe (COM(2018) 237 final)  
- European Commission (2018): “ Artificial Intelligence for Europe ” (The European AI 
Strategy)  
  
                                                           
12  Convention on the design, development, and application of artificial intelligence systems based on the 
Council of Europe’s standards o n human rights, democracy and the rule of law, and conducive to 
innovation, in accordance with the relevant decisions of the Committee of Ministers  
 
21 7. DIGITAL COMMONS AS A GLOBAL PUBLIC GOOD 
Core principles  
Digital commons can be defined as infor mation and knowledge resources that are collectively 
created and owned or shared among a community. With the precondition that contributions and 
governance be distributed and not centralized in the hands of one or a few entities only, most 
of the open sour ce software, hardware, standards and open data can be included in this 
definition.  
As reflected in the UN´s Road map for digital coo peration: implementation of the 
recommendations of the High -level Panel on Digital Cooperation - Report of the Secretary -
General , the EU considers Digital Public Goods (DPGs) - such as Open Source Software, open 
data, open standards, AI libraries/standards  (open), open content, etc. - as accelerators of the 
SDG s and a contribution to a more equitable world13. 
Digital commons bridge geographical divisions: the commons developed in one area of the 
world can be re -used or enriched elsewhere, including in develo ping countries through 
government agencies, non -governmental organisations, universities etc. These benefits can be 
translated in economic terms14, including for the public sector resulting in lower costs and 
increasing its digital autonomy. Digital commons  need to be relevant, safe and sustainable.  
DPGs have to follow certain principles and standards  as also underlined in the UN´s Road 
map: “In par ticular, it  is fundamental that DPGs be compliant with privacy, digital public rights 
and a human -centric appro ach.  
The EU supports Digital Public Goods also outside the Union. Due  to its participatory nature 
(the development of DGPs also implies the contribution of the consumers, citizens, academia 
among others) and knowledge sharing, innovation can be leveraged as well as a stronger 
competitive market, boosting innovation.  DPG Platforms can provide an important 
contribution to share digital public goods, engage talent, and pool data sets.   
Core principles include:  
 Encourage talents to contribute to digital common s, including through public funding at 
national, regional and global levels.  
 Facilitate global cooperation of commoners, as commons know no borders.  
 Facilitate the interoperability of international Digital Public Goods on the basis of the 
respect of global  core principles and standards.  
 Stimulate shared governance of digital commons and avoid concentration.  
 Incentivise commoners to develop trust technologies for ensuring transparency, privacy 
protection, user control and choice through interoperable and sta ndardised commons.  
                                                           
13  Road map for digital cooperation: implementation of the recommendations of the High -level Panel on 
Digital Cooperation - Report of the Secretary -General  
14  The European Commission published a study in 2021 predicting that an increase of 10% in contributions 
to open source software code would generate annually an additional 0.4% to 0.6% of GDP, as well as 
more than 600 additional ICT start -ups in the EU.  
 
22  Enable open data and develop policies to empower more actors – ideally the general public 
– to use data.  
Key commitments  
The European Union has embraced a human -centric approach to digital transformation, where 
digital technologies, in particular internet technologies, are developed in response to humans’ 
needs and based on the principles of openness, trustworthiness, decent ralisation, safety (the 
key references are the EU Declaration on Digital Principles and Rights and the Declaration for 
the Future of the Internet).  
As reflected in the UN´s Road map for digital cooperation and the SDGs, including SDG 9, 
and in line with t he EU’s Global Gateway strategy, the EU commits  to promote and support 
resilient and trusted digital infrastructures , the enhancement of democratic digital societies 
beyond EU borders, digital public infrastructure and digital public goods, and digital 
commons15. The European Union is leading several funding and legislative programmes that 
nurture digital commons, such as:  
- Next Generation Internet initiative:  The European Commission -lead programme 
provides funding for Open Source software and hardware to  more than 700 grass -root 
projects covering all layers of the Internet, including applications, networks  and cloud, 
which are crucial to develop digital commons and address specific needs of commoners.  
- Data Legislation : the European Union is actively contr ibuting to the creation of data 
commons. This effort includes: the Open Data Directive stimulates releasing open 
government data and open access for research data; the Data Governance Act that intends 
to reinforce trust in data sharing .  
- Open Source Observatory : works as a single information point for Open Source 
initiatives in the EU public sector. It provides Free and Open Sourc e software expertise and 
information as well as serves as middle -ground to connect European Public 
Administrations with other relevant stakeholders.  
- Open Source Programme Office (OSPO) : has been established to promote the role of 
Public administrations in  stimulating general adoption of open source.  
The EU also supports trust and distribution of digital commons and more broadly digital public 
goods within broader initiatives , which could also be referenced in the GLOBAL DIGITAL 
COMPACT : 
 Envisaged promotion  of DPGs through a collaboration with the International 
telecommunications Union (ITU) and the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP). This potential action will support ‘Open Source Software ecosystem enablers for 
public service’.  
 Acknowledging the work of the Digital Public Good Alliance  (DPGA). Member -
organisations demonstrate a strong commitment to digital public goods and are committed 
to supporting the DPGA’s mission and mandate.  
 The GovStack Initiative : ITU, Estonia, Germany, and the Digital Impact Alliance (at the 
United Nations Foundation) launched the GovStack Initiative in 2020 with the goal of 
                                                           
15  Council Conclusions on EU Digital Diplomacy  
 
23 accelerating national digital transformation and the digitalization of government services 
for achievement of Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. The Digital Nation s work as 
an international forum of leading digital governments, connected by the principle of user 
needs, open standards, open source, open markets, open government, connectivity, teaching 
children to code, assisted digital and a commitment to share and l earn.  
 The implementation of the recommendations made by nineteen Member States in the report 
‘Towards a Sovereign Digital Infrastructure of Commons”. Under the right conditions, 
digital commons contribute to the preservation of the collective control and v aluation of 
both quality and re -use of data and digital infrastructures, and consequently foster 
innovation, social value and sustainability.  
Key EU documents  
- Council  Conclusions on Digital Diplomacy  
- Our Common Agenda report  
- Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council on strengthening the 
EU’s contribution to rules -based multilateralism EEAS Website (europa.eu)  
- Study on the impact of Open Source Software and Hardware on technological 
independence, competitiveness and innovation in the EU economy  
- EU Declaration on Digital Rights and Principles  for the Digital Decade  
- European Commission's Open Source Programme Office plan  
- European legislation on open data  
- European Data Governance Act  
- Data Act  
- Next Generation Internet initiative  
- Towards a Sover eign Digital Infrastructure  
  
 
24 8. TRUSTED CONNECTIVITY  
Core principles  
The COVID -19 pandemic heightened the importance of access to secure and trustworthy 
digital infrastructures and technologies underpinned by proper regulation. As global internet 
traffic is expected to grow more than six -fold by 2030, broadband connectivity will become a 
necessity in the transition toward a data -driven economy and society.  We recognize the rising 
energy and resource demands of the increasing use of digital technologies and se rvices, such 
as data centres and telecommunications networks, and the environmental impacts of 
production, use and disposal of digital equipment and devices.  
Trusted connectivity relies on both physical infrastructure – such as fibre optic cables – as well 
as an enabling environment that is  accessible and affordable, and people have the relevant 
digital skills. It  is important to make sure projects deliver, bas ed on attractive investment and 
business -friendly trading conditions, regulatory convergence, standardisation, supply chain 
integration, and financial services.  
Investments in connectivity should be human -rights centred and values -based, as well as fully 
aligned with the UN’s 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and the 
Paris Agreement. Core principles for all EU connectivity investments include:  
 Democratic values and high standards  
 Good Governance and Transparency  
 Equal partnerships  
 Green and clean16 
 Security -focus  
 Catalysing private sector investment  
 Human rights and gender equ ality 
 Furthermore, the promotion of digital  humanities and digital humanism  is essential in this 
context.  
Key commitments  
In line with the Global Gateway strategy , the EU will promote and support resilient and 
trusted Digital infrastructures, the enhancement of democratic digital societies beyond EU 
Borders, digital public infrastructure and digital public goods, and digital commons . The EU 
will offer its financing  under fair and favourable terms in order to limit the risk of debt distress. 
It will help build sustainable infrastructure with the support, skills and the finance needed to 
operate it. In implementing Global Gateway, the EU will work closely through a Te am Europe 
approach and with like -minded partners to develop synergies between their respective efforts 
on connectivity and quality infrastructure with third countries and achieve the maximum 
impact in closing the global infrastructure gap.  
The EU will buil d on the global trend towards convergence with the General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) to inspire other countries to promote secure data flows. Global Gateway 
                                                           
16  The twin green & digital  transition: How sustainable digital technologies could enable a carbon -neutral 
EU by 2050   
 
25 will promote a regulatory model of open and competitive markets for communications 
networks  and services , based on access to the Open Internet, given its role as a key driver of 
innovation, socio -political, economic, and cultural development.  
Reflecting these commitments, the EU considers that the Global Digital Compact should 
promote the follow ing principles and actions to underpin Trust in the Digital Ecosystem :  
 General trust in the digital ecosystem and public institutions as such should be increased 
through clear democratic principles and institutional initiatives focusing on responsibility,  
transparency and human rights. These principles, when implementing specific digital 
services, may also aid in generating situational trust in public servants and institutions.  
 Work together to combat cybercrime, and deter malicious cyber activity, includi ng through 
multilateral channels. The ongoing work of the hoc Committee to Elaborate a Convention 
on Cybercrime should be supported.  
 Work together to combat online hate speech, disinformation and online sexual and gender -
based violence and harassment, whic h widens the gender digital divide, prevents a full, safe 
and inclusive participation in online spaces and equal participation in society.  
 Promote efforts by relevant bodies such as UNODC to support Member States in building 
up capacities to prevent and co mbat cybercrime in a holistic manner, including by 
increasing efficiencies in the investigation and prosecution of cybercrime.  
 Promote the protection of consumers, in particular vulnerable consumers, from online 
scams and other unfair practices online and  from dangerous and unsafe products sold 
online.  
 Ensure that government and relevant authorities’ access to personal data is based in law 
and conducted in accordance with international human rights law.  
 Protect individuals’ privacy, their personal data, the confidentiality and end -to-end 
encryption of electronic communications and information on end -users’ electronic devices, 
consistent with the protection of public safety and applicable domestic EU, and 
international law.  
 Promote and use trustworthy net work infrastructure and services suppliers, relying on risk -
based assess ments that include technical and non -technical factors for network security.  
 Refrain from using the Internet to undermine the electoral infrastructure, electoral and 
political pro cesses, including through information manipulation campaigns.  
 Promote the access to a quality information environment and the exercise of democratic 
rights17 free from malicious and inauthentic interference.  
 Support a rules -based global digital economy which fosters trade and contestable and 
innovation .  
 Cooperate to maximize the enabling effects of technology for combatting climate change 
and protecting the environment, whilst reducing as much as possible the environmental 
footprint of the Internet and digita l technologies (Green and Digital transition).  
Key EU documents  
- Joint Communication on Global Gateway   
- Council Conclusions on Digital Diplomacy   
- G20 Principles for Quality Infras tructure Investment  (other documents)  
                                                           
17  E.g. freedom of expression, the right to seek, receive and impart information, the right to free assembly  