SOUTHERN ALLIANCE 
FOR THE GLOBAL DIGITAL 
COMPACT: CONTRIBUTION 
FOR THE PROMOTION OF 
DIGITAL HUMAN RIGHTS

2DESCRIPTION
In the beginning of 2023, a new alliance was formed by five NGOs 
- Data Privacy Brasil (Brazil), Aapti Institute (India), InternetBolivia 
Foundation (Bolivia), KICTANet (Kenya), and Paradigm Initiative 
(PIN) (Nigeria). Our main focus is the Global Digital Compact, which 
seeks to promote and protect human rights in the digital age. We 
believe that the digital landscape is rapidly evolving and that it 
is necessary to establish guidelines to ensure that technological 
advancements are used to benefit society as a whole.
As a group, we are committed to fostering a Global South 
conversation. We recognize that many of the issues related to digital 
rights and privacy are unique to countries in the Global South and 
require a specific approach. Our alliance is dedicated to advocating 
for policies and regulations that take into account the realities of 
the Global South and the unique challenges faced by people in 
these regions. Therefore, we are an alliance united by the vision of 
advancing digital rights protections for all, within the Global South.
After a few years involved in networks of NGOs from the Global 
South, we began more systematic efforts for joint advocacy in 
international spaces. Through these involvements, we engaged in 
two strategic meetings, in August 2022 and in November 2022, in 
which we, as a collective, discussed the challenges faced by the 
Global South in the digital and human rights agenda. We exchanged 
ideas and information about the most pressing issues faced by 
our respective communities and developed a plan of action to 
address them. We are excited about the potential impact that this 
Southern Alliance can have and are committed to working together 
to ensure that human rights are respected in the digital age. Each 
entity brought its expertise in one of the areas of the Compact. The 
members are from different countries, with representation from the 
Latin American, Asian and African continents.
3THE PROCESS
The Alliance held 3 online meetings, in addition to exchanging 
asynchronous emails, to work together on this contribution. At the 
first meeting, each entity opted for an area of greater expertise, 
to be the responsible rapporteur. Then, each entity chose to be 
the reviewer of another area, different from the first chosen to 
report. Deadlines were agreed for the delivery and revision of the 
texts, to be later collected and submitted in this contribution. It is 
noteworthy that each area was reported and reviewed by different 
continents, which brings a true representation of the Global 
South to the digital cooperation agenda and commitment to the 
Sustainable Development Goals.
4ABOUT THE AUTHORS
http://dataprivacy.org.br
Data Privacy Brasil Research Association is a non-profit civil society 
organization that promotes the protection of personal data and 
other fundamental rights in the face of the emergence of new 
technologies, social inequalities, and power asymmetries. We work 
to promote a culture of data protection and to ensure that digital 
rights are fundamental rights for everyone, carrying out research 
that is open to the public, guided by a strong social commitment 
and with ethical funding.
http://aapti.in
Aapti Institute is a public research organisation based in India 
that works at the intersection of technology and society to 
build solutions that enhance societal impact, justice and equity. 
Our work spans many aspects of our digital lives - we conduct 
research, develop solutions, and embed them in policy and within 
organisations to achieve scale.
http:// Internetbolivia.org
InternetBolivia Foundation is a non-profit organization that was 
born in the year 2018 from the impulse of a group of activists 
working at various intersections between technology and the 
common good. Its mission is to contribute to the promotion of 
human rights in digital environments and digital inclusion in Bolivia 
through research, dialogue and public policy discussion.

5https://paradigmhq.org
Paradigm Initiative (PIN) connects underserved young Africans 
with digital opportunities and ensures the protection of digital 
rights. Across regional offices in Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, Zambia, 
Zimbabwe, Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), 
and beyond, PIN impacts youth with improved livelihoods through 
digital inclusion and digital rights programs.
https://kictanet.or.ke
KICTANet is a multi-stakeholder Think Tank for ICT policy and 
regulation. The Think Tank is a catalyst for reform in the Information 
and Communication Technology sector. Its work is guided by 
four pillars of Policy Advocacy, Capacity Building, Research, and 
Stakeholder Engagement. KICTANet’s mission is to promote 
an enabling environment in the ICT sector that is robust, open, 
accessible, and rights-based through multistakeholder approaches.

6CONNECT ALL PEOPLE
Core Principles
• Internet access enables the exercise of several Human 
Rights such as Freedom of Expression, Access to 
Information, and Access to Education, that allow a 
beneficial participation in the digital society.
• Nearly half of the world’s population has no Internet access 
and as a result cannot fully enjoy their Human Rights. 
We must uphold every person’s right to connect to the 
Internet. and participate in the digital world in an equal 
way, with meaningful connectivity.
• Connectivity and Digital Inclusion must be looked at as a 
single, related issue and not two separate issues. Following 
the reflections of the Alliance for Affordable Internet 
(A4AI), “look at the users on this network, not just the 
network’s coverage”.
• Meaningful Internet access refers to affordability, being 
able to use the Internet openly and unfiltered, on a daily 
basis, with an appropriate device, including enough data 
(when it is a mobile connection), with minimum technical 
requirements related to speed and latency. 
• Ensure that citizens have digital skills to enjoy the digital 
space, digital security to avoid risks, and without suffering 
any discrimination based on gender, race, ethnicity, 
geography, age, or any other discriminating factor.
• Structural conditions for digital inequality, such as 
discriminatory colonial structures, economic conditions, 
and cultural norms must be acknowledged and addressed. 
Vulnerable social groups include women and girls, 
LGBTIQ+, indigenous peoples, seniors, and people with 
disabilities. Intersectionalities, being part of two or more 
vulnerable groups, serve to worsen inequalities.
7• Violent online actions against vulnerable groups specified 
above, such as hate speech, online harassment, online 
sexual exploitation, diverse types of frauds and cybercrime 
are rampant and must be addressed on priority.
• There are different models for provision of Internet: 
private, public and community based and different ways 
to combine them. Every model should have a regulatory 
framework and respond to specific characteristics of each 
country: geographical, social, historical, cultural, etc.
• Internet connectivity should not be provided at the cost 
of personal data extractivism, predatory practices to the 
environment or any other conditioning factors that can be 
harmful to human rights.
• Importance of community networks must be recognised 
since they can deliver access to underserved areas 
with infrastructure built, managed and used by local 
communities.
Key commitments, pledges, or actions
FOR INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
• Meaningful connectivity to the Internet must be included as 
a core and structural policy included in the SDGs.
• International organizations should adopt standards based 
on meaningful connectivity to promote universal and equal 
access to the Internet.
• Specific funding should become available for less-
developed States to close the digital divide.
FOR GOVERNMENTS AT ALL LEVELS
• States should design and implement public policies 
to promote universal and equal access to the Internet, 
8addressing structural discriminatory social conditions 
and take into account the specific characteristics of the 
territories.
• Community networks should not be prohibited and legal 
obstacles should be facilitated to encourage them.
• Develop public policies combining public, private and 
community based solutions for broadband services and 
connectivity devices for all. These policies should ensure 
regulatory and reinforcement mechanisms for community 
networks and other community based solutions as well as 
the others. 
• Prohibit the arbitrary and deliberate slowing and/or 
shutting off of the Internet specially during political events 
and others of public interest.
• Enhance transparency in all actions and promotion of social 
participation in all phases, such as designing, funding, 
managing of the spectrum, decisions on the provision, 
performance indicators, and others.
• States should also ensure enough resources to maintain 
free wi-fi in schools as well as teachers that facilitate the 
educational efforts to use digital resources and skills to 
improve communities’ life.
FOR PRIVATE SECTOR
• Complement their efforts of connectivity provision with 
other community based solutions in the idea of having 
everybody meaningfully connected.
• Develop applications and other innovations ensuring 
accessibility for all, including people with physical, sensory, 
or cognitive disabilities, people who are not literate, and 
people who speak minority languages.
9FOR TECHNICAL AND ACADEMIA ACTORS
• Promote research and improvements to reduce inequalities.
• Assess the government’s core Internet usage indicators 
periodically, in order to identify improvements.
FOR CIVIL SOCIETY
• To develop community networks to solve connectivity gaps 
of the private and public models of service provision.
• Monitor the development of the public policies and 
demand information and open data about that.
• Implement capacity building efforts on digital skills and 
digital security for everybody but specially for vulnerable 
populations.
10PROTECT ALL DATA
Core Principles
• Lawfulness, fairness, and transparency principle: States, 
organizations and private entities should collect and 
process personal data in line with the relevant data 
protection laws in place and in due regard to the principles 
of justice, human dignity and transparency. 
• Purpose Limitation principle: States, organizations and 
private entities should collect personal data for specific, 
explicit, and legitimate purposes and not process the said 
data in a manner that is incompatible with those purposes. 
• Data Minimisation principle: States, organizations and 
private entities should limit personal data collection and 
processing should be limited to what is strictly necessary 
and relevant for the purpose for which it is being 
processed. 
• Accuracy principle: States, organizations and private 
entities should ensure that personal data that is collected 
and processed by a data controller or processor is kept 
accurate and up to date. Every reasonable step should 
be taken to ensure that personal data that is inaccurate is 
erased or rectified without delay. 
• Storage Limitation principle: States, organizations and 
private entities should ensure that personal data should 
only be kept for only the period that is necessary for the 
purposes of processing the said data. Specific time lines 
should be put in place for erasure or periodic review of the 
personal data. 
• Integrity and Confidentiality principle: States, organizations 
and private entities should ensure that personal data is 
processed in a manner that maximizes the security and 
confidentiality of the personal data in question. 
11• Accountability principle: All data controller/processor 
be they States, organizations and private entities have a 
responsibility to demonstrate that they have complied with 
all the above listed principles.
Key commitments, pledges, or actions
FOR GOVERNMENTS AT ALL LEVELS
• To promote a multistakeholder approach, collaboration 
and partnerships to ensure respect for data privacy;
• To conduct data protection impact assessments before 
embarking on mass data collection and processing 
activities;
• Work together with civil society to increase awareness of 
data privacy especially for ordinary citizens to enable them 
to report privacy violations;
• To develop an accreditation framework for institutions and 
certification of privacy professionals;
• Work towards developing regulations on Big technology 
companies and fintechs through the development of a 
Data Protection Code of Ethics for Big Tech;
• The Global South should adopt a collaborative approach to 
rein in on harmful practices regarding personal data by Big 
Tech companies.
FOR CIVIL SOCIETY
• To promote public awareness on gendered as well as non 
gendered privacy concerns;
• To use joint advocacy efforts and alliances to advocate 
on common pain points with regards to personal data 
protection;
12• To adopt a collaborative strategy when engaging with 
government and independent regulators to achieve desired 
outcomes by mutual agreement.
FOR PRIVATE SECTOR
• To proactively adopt the principles of privacy in their 
operations as well as privacy by default and design in the 
technologies they choose to deploy.
13REGULATION OF ARTIFI -CIAL INTELLIGENCE
Core Principles
• Global asymmetry awareness: for the recognition of 
disparities between the countries of the Global North and 
Global South, and for the promotion of global best practices 
in AI to reduce existing asymmetries, especially in the 
collection and processing of data from the Global South by 
the Global North, through greater monitoring of international 
observers, such as UN agencies and secretariats;
• Principle of multistakeholder and networked governance: 
regulation as a collective undertaking, and not just 
monopolized by the state, using a responsive regulation 
framework for it;
• Principle of informational due process: meaningful 
enforcement of human rights in the scenario of semi or 
fully-automated decisions to guarantee the adversary 
proceedings and the right to a fair hearing, especially in the 
fields of algorithmic management and working conditions, 
and in databases directly related to the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), such as about climate 
development and indigenous peoples;
• Algorithmic fairness principle: algorithms should not unfairly 
discriminate against individuals or groups, being one of the 
main aspects of accountability processes;
• Precautionary principle: reduce information asymmetry by 
having a public scrutiny with regards the risks of AI systems 
to human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to have 
regulatory intervention proportionate to these risks;
• Harmonization between risk-based and rights-based 
approaches: the risk-based approach as a potential enabler of 
fundamental rights and not as a flexibilization of them.
14Key commitments, pledges, or actions
FOR GOVERNMENTS AT ALL LEVELS
• To create a public, open and searchable database on 
high-risk AI, regularly updated, as well as reports on the 
impact of personal data protection and human rights.
• To propose Regulatory Sandboxes, subject to 
an independent oversight entity formed by a 
diverse and multistakeholder committee.
• To publicize the use of AI in public systems, providing 
clear and accessible explanations for systems, whose 
results cannot be explained by their inputs and rules.
• To prohibit the use of AI for social scoring and/or 
reputational systems that restrict access to social rights.
• To encourage the use of AI to face socioeconomic 
inequalities and prevent the formation of 
monopolies involved in the development 
and implementation of these systems.
• To ensure independent oversight throughout the processes 
of development, implementation, and accountability of 
AI systems, linked to the competent regulatory system.
• To ensure legal exceptions, with due legal certainty, so 
that international commitments (such as international 
trade agreements) about protecting source code 
and algorithms do not restrict AI regulation in 
relation to transparency and accountability.
FOR GOVERNMENTS AT ALL LEVELS
AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR
• To carry out human rights impact assessments, ensuring 
due participatory process and public scrutiny.
• To provide the right of explainability and review on all 
15automated or semi-automated decisions that impact 
human rights, in an accessible and transparent way.
• To encourage the development of systems in 
native languages, favoring the active participation 
of all communities in the digital ecosystem.
FOR ACADEMIA AND THE TECHNICAL COMMUNITY
• To expose biases, applications that are discriminatory and 
have extensive data collection, in addition to monitoring AI 
implementations.
• To review human rights impact assessments and other 
documentation supplied by the government and the private 
sector, regarding the use and application of AI systems.
FOR CIVIL SOCIETY
• To review human rights impact assessments and other 
documentation suppliedby the government and the private 
sector, regarding the use and application of AI systems.
FOR CIVIL SOCIETY, ACADEMIA
AND THE TECHNICAL COMMUNITY
• To promote awareness and literacy on the public value 
of AI systems, through public education and civic 
engagement.
FOR INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
• Within their respective mandates, supervise and ensure 
that such guidelines are complied with by all stakeholders, 
promoting spaces for dialogue and learning.
16DIGITAL COMMONS AS A GLOBAL PUBLIC GOOD
Core Principles
• Common understanding of digital commons and enabling 
infrastructure: While terms such as digital commons, digital 
public infrastructure and digital public goods have been 
widely used in the last few years, there exists discrepancy 
in the way various institutions use these phrases. These 
are terms borrowed from traditional economic discourse 
and have been applied to the digital sphere. However, 
their application does not quite match traditional uses of 
the terms. For us to recognize digital commons as global 
public goods, and action them as such, it is essential to 
have a common understanding of them.
• Recognizing critical infrastructure that support digital 
commons: In addition to recognizing digital commons and 
adequately governing them, it is critical that we identify the 
necessary supporting infrastructure that supports these 
digital commons and govern them in the nature of public 
infrastructure / critical infrastructure.
• Embedding inclusion in the design of digital commons: 
Like most digital technologies, access to and participation 
in digital commons is not equal, but stymied by structural 
inequities – based on gender, ethnicity, and wealth 
among others. These inequities are also aggravated by 
disparities regarding the digital – be it digital connectivity 
or digital literacy. The design and implementation of digital 
commons must take these factors into account to prevent 
further disenfranchisement and abuse of human rights.
• Promotion of community rights of data: Data is integral to 
the operation of digital commons. Data either informs the 
design and implementation of them or flows out of their 
operation. In both scenarios, data is crucial not only to the 
17functioning of digital commons but has significant value in 
the insights it provides about communities. In the age of 
surveillance capitalism, such data poses a serious threat to 
communities at large. Given this gravity of data, and seeing 
as in many cases data is generated by the community 
themselves, there needs to be a recognition of communities’ 
rights over data with affordances that can help them seek 
value from it and guard themselves from abuse.
• Democratizing access to digital commons beyond open 
data: Given existing inequities, there exist only limited actors 
who can make adequate use of open data. For digital 
commons to be equitable, there needs to be equitable 
access to education and technology that allows individuals 
to make use of open data to further social benefit.
Key commitments, pledges, or actions
FOR GOVERNMENTS AT ALL LEVELS
• To develop data legislation that does not favor data 
localization, but allows for cross border flow of data, with 
globally accepted restrictions that ensure data security and 
safety;
• To adopt a multistakeholder approach in developing the 
definitions of key terms around digital commons so as to 
prevent capture of these terms by certain entities, as is the 
case currently. This can include incentivizing inputs from 
academic and civil society organizations;
• To incentivize all stakeholder to examine and understand 
the environmental impact of digital technologies, including 
those that are deemed to be digital commons. New, 
promising technologies, such as large language models, 
have a tremendous impact on the environment, and it is 
typically marginalized communities that are most affected 
by climate change;
18• As far as possible, States should encourage a system of 
networked institutions and associations deploying digital 
commons projects, instead of unifying them into a single 
national infrastructure;
• States must come together to establish an international 
treaty to govern the protection of global commons, holding 
the ideals of equity and justice at its core.
FOR GOVERNMENTS AT ALL LEVELS
AND THE PRIVATE SECTOR
• To work together to democratize access to enabling 
technologies that will allow a greater percentage of the 
population to harness data for social good.
FOR CIVIL SOCIETY
• To undertake more initiatives to upskill marginalized 
communities in the use of digital technologies and on 
data rights. For this, civil society organizations should be 
adequately incentivized by States and philanthropic funders.
FOR ACADEMIA AND CIVIL SOCIETY
• To develop a common, theoretical foundation for terms 
such as digital commons, digital public goods, and digital 
public infrastructure.
FOR INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
AND THE GLOBAL COMMUNITY
• The global community must incentivize the sustainable 
development of digital commons. Sustainable modes 
of development are onerous and historical inequities 
created through unsustainable development over-burden 
19the Global South. Multilateral forums should therefore 
provide support to Global South nations for the sustainable 
development of digital commons and related technologies.
20You are free to:
Share — copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
Adapt — remix, transform, and build upon the material
