 1 
 
Binary’s Submission to the Global Digital Compact  
 
March 2023  
 
 
 
 
Binary  is a non -profit organisation, aiming to bridge the culture of the 
physical and digital world, tackling the digital divide, the on/off 
switches, establishing the anthropocentric principles and values to the 
digital era . 
 
https://www.thebinary.org  
 
The submission was drafted by Dr Mando Rachovitsa . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2 
Setting a Human Rights Compliant Legal Framework for the Use of Spyware  
 
A. The Use of Spyware Violates Human Rights  
1. Pegasus and Mobile Device Hacking: Severe Interferences with the Exercise of 
Human Rights  
2. Upholding Media Freedom and the Safety of Journalists in the Digital Age   
 
B. Revising the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Export Control Regime  
 
C. States’ Obligations under the Global Human Rights Framework  
1. Reinforcing Safeguards in National Legislation  
2. Requirements for Authorising Spyware Surveillance Operations  
3. Strict Assessment of National Security as the Basis for a Spyware Surveillance 
Operation  
4. Notification of Individuals Placed under Targeted S urveillance  
5. Effective and Independent Ex -post Oversigh t  
6. Effective and Meaningful Legal Remedies for Targeted Surveillance  
 
Appendix 1 : Key commitments, pledges, or actions that should be taken by different 
stakeholders – governments, private sector, civil society  
 
Appendix 2 : Core principles that all governments, companies, civil society organisations and 
other stakeholders should adhere to  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
Setting a Human Rights Compliant Legal Framework  
for the Use of Spyware  
 
 
A. The Use of Spyware Violates Human Rights  
 
Spyware is intrusive covert technology for surveillance of the content of individuals’ digital 
communications and other information, including metadata (e.g., location, duration, source and 
contacts). It has proliferated internationally out of all control and poses substantial  risks to the 
effective exercise of human rights.1  
 
Our knowledge of the problem is very limited due to the secrecy in the market. What we know 
of exists mainly thanks to the digital -forensic work of non -governmental researchers, such as 
Citizen Lab , and tenacious reporting by civil society organisations and the media, especially 
investigative reporting.2 The huge challenges involved are illustrated by the recent revelations 
concerni ng the use by repressive regimes of Pegasus, a surveillance software programme 
manufactured by the intelligence company NSO Group based in Israel. In 2021, the Pegasus 
Project , a collective of investigative journalists, NGOs and researchers, brought to the surface 
a list of 50,000 persons who had been targeted with spyware. Among them, journalists, 
lawyers, prosecutors, activists, politicians, and even (former) heads of state. Citizen Lab has 
identified Pegasus software being used as a surveillance tool targeting individuals in 45 
countries, including Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Togo, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland and the United Sta tes.3  On 10 March 2022, the European Parliament decided 
to set up a Committee of Inquiry to investigate the use of Pegasus and equivalent surveillance 
spyware (PEGA Committee).4 The PEGA Committee found that many EU States, including 
 
1 Human rights implications of the development, use and transfer of new technologies in the context of counter -
terrorism and countering and preventing violent extremism, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion 
and protection of human rights and fu ndamental freedoms while countering terrorism, Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, UN 
Doc A/HRC/52/39, 1 March 2023, [44].  
2 Surveillance and human rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to 
freedom of opinion and expression,  UN Doc A/HRC/41/35, 28 May 2019, [1].  
3 Bill Marczak, John Scott -Railton, Bahr Abdul Razzak, Noura Al -Jizawi, Siena Anstis, Kristin Berdan, and Ron 
Deibert, Pegasus vs. Predator  Dissident’s Doubly -Infected iPhone Reveals Cytrox Mercenary Spyware , 16 
December 2021, https://citizenlab.ca/2021/12/pegasus -vs-predator -dissidents -doubly -infected -iphone -reveals -
cytrox -merce nary-spyware/ ; Surveillance and human rights report (n 2) [9].  
4 Committee of Inquiry to investigate the use of Pegasus and equivalent surveillance spyware, Draft Report, 8 
November 2022, Rapporteur: Sophie in ’t Veld, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/PEGA -PR-
738492_EN.pdf . 
 4 
Poland, Hungary, Gr eece and Cyprus , have used Pegasus and other brands of surveillance 
spyware against journalists, politicians, law enforcement officials, diplomats, lawyers, 
business people, civil society actors and other actors in an illegal and abusive manner.5 
 
1. Pegasus and Mobile Device Hacking: Severe Interferences with the Exercise of 
Human Rights  
Pegasus spyware is a surveillance product which offers the capability of hacking remotely 
directly into mobile devices. The use of Pegasus leads to such serious interferences with the 
right to privacy that it is hardly possible to be considered proportiona te.6 This is so for a series 
of reasons:  
▪ Contrary to classic wiretapping, spyware enables control over the mobile system 
allowing access not only to incoming/outgoing conversations, but also to all messages, 
log calls, files (e.g., images and documents) o n a phone, allowing to build a full profile 
of a victim.7  
▪ This full -control access includes retroactive access to files and messages created in the 
past, as well as metadata about past communications. 8  
▪ The victim is not aware of the use of spyware.  
▪ Spyware leaves few traces on the victim's device, and, even if it is detected, it is nearly 
impossible to prove who was responsible for the attack.  
▪ Crucially, not only direct victims have their rights affected, but also potentially all their 
contacts who ar e indirect victims also suffering possible violations of their human 
rights.  
 
Targeted and covert surveillance of individuals – often journalists, activists, opposition figures, 
critics and others exercising their right to freedom of expression – has been shown to lead to 
silencing dissent, sanctioning criticism or punishing independent reporting.9 The sanctions may 
not be applied to the targets but to their networks of contacts. The targeted communities know 
 
5 Committee of Inquiry to investigate the use of Pegasus and equivalent surveillance spyware, 4 January 2023, 
European Parliament Draft Recommendation to the Council and the Commission, pursuant t o Rule 208(12) of the 
Rules of Procedure, following the investigation of alleged contraventions and maladministration in the application 
of Union law in relation to the use of Pegasus and equivalent surveillance spyware,  
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/PEGA -RD-740554_EN.pdf , 3. 
6 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) 3; PEGA Draft Recommendation  
7 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) 3.  
8 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [430].  
9 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [1].  
 5 
of or suspect such attempts at surveillance, wh ich in turn shapes and restricts their capacity to 
exercise the rights to freedom of expression, association, religious belief, culture.10 
 
The impact of surveillance on multiple human rights is considerable. The abuse of spyware 
does not just violate the right to privacy of individuals.  The UN Special Rapporteur on the 
promotion and protection  of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering 
terrorism highlights that the right to privacy functions as a gateway right  protecting and 
enab ling many other rights and freedoms, and its protection is intimately related to the existence 
and advancement of a democratic society.11 Participation in public life becomes impossible 
without the certainty of being free and unobserved.  
 
2. Upholding Media Freedom and the Safety of Journalists in the Digital Age   
Independent, free and pluralistic news media is a pillar of democracy, a tool to support 
accountability and transparency, and a means to sustain open deliberation and encourage the 
exchange of diverse views.12 Public interest media, and in particular investigative journalism, 
play a crucial role in ensuring access to reliable information on vital issues.13 Targeted 
electronic surveillance of journalists poses a challenge to investigat ive journalism and 
compromises the confidentiality of journalistic sources. States have used targeted digital 
surveillance to limit investigative journalism, intimidate, control public narratives, and 
undercut critical reporting.14 Widespread digital surve illance practices ultimately discourage 
confidential sources from communicating with journalists, with significant chilling effects  on 
free press, civil society, whistle -blowing and investigative journalism .15 For instance,  in the 
case of journalist Thanasis Koukakis, who was spied on by spyware Predator for at least three 
months,  the International Federation of Journalists condemned the Greek government’s 
attempts to interfere with journalists' communications and urged for a swift investig ation.16 
 
10 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [21].  
11 Human rights implications of the development, use and tra nsfer of new technologies in the context of counter -
terrorism (note 1) [45].  
12 Reinforcing media freedom and the safety of journalists in the digital age, Report of the Special Rapporteur on 
the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, UN Doc A/HRC/50/29, 20 April 
2022, [13].  
13 Reinforcing media freedom and the safety of journalists in the digital age (n ote 12) [14], [43].  
14 Reinforcing media freedom and the safety of journalists in the digital age (n ote 12) [45],  [49].  
15 Reinforcing media freedom and the safety of journalists in the digital age (note 12) [47].  
16 Greece: Journalist spied on by new surveillance software , 14 April 2022, https://www.ifj.org/media -
centre/news/detail/category/press -releases/article/greece -journalist -spied-on-by-new-surveillance -software -
report.html . See also Eliza Triantafullou and Tasos Tell oglou, Εvidence of a joint National Intelligence Service -
Predator surveillance centre , 24 March 2023 , https://insidestory.gr/article/evidence -joint-nis-predator -
surveillance -centre . 
 6 
B. Revising the Wassenaar Arrangement and the Export Control Regime  
 
The Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual -Use Goods 
and Technologies  is a multilateral export control regime for controlling conventional arms and  
dual use goods and technologies. It was updated to include interception, intrusion and IP 
network surveillance technologies on its list of controlled items. It defines intrusion software 
as ‘software specially designed or modified to avoid detection by mo nitoring tools, or to defeat 
protective countermeasures’ and that either extracted data from a computer or network device 
or modified the ‘standard execution path’ of a program to allow ‘the execution of externally 
provided instructions.’ This definition i ncludes spyware.17 
 
The effectiveness of the international export control regime created by the Wassenaar 
Arrangement is limited . First, the Wassenaar Arrangement is non -binding. Second, several 
major arms exporters, including Israel, China, and Belarus, are not part of the 42 States 
participating in the Wassenaar Arrangement retaining open a significant export controls gap.18 
Third, because of Russia’s nonconstructive participation, the a bility for consensus through this 
mechanism is increasingly limited.19 Finally, while the Wassenaar Arrangement limits the 
export of sensitive dual use goods and technologies to non -participating States, it does not 
prohibit the purchase of surveillance te chnology from a non -participating States.20 The 
transparency requirements  set up by the  Wassenaar Arrangement are also  inadequate .21 
 
More importantly, the Wassenaar Arrangement’s framework is ill -suited for addressing the 
threats that targeted surveillance pose to human rights , since  it lacks any guidelines or 
enforcement measures that would directly address human rights violations caused by 
surveillance tools.22 
 
 
17 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [445] -[447].  
18 Currently, the following states participate: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, 
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Ne therlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, 
Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia , South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States.  
19 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [445] -[447].  
20 PEGA Draf t Report (note 4) [445] -[447].  
21 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [445] -[447].  
22 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [34].  
 7 
The problem is so urgent that many  United Nations (U N) and other bodies have calle d an 
immediate moratorium on the export, sale, transfer, use or servicing of privately 
developed surveillance tools until a human rights -compliant safeguards regime is in place.  
The U N High Commissioner for Human Rights, the  UN Special Rapporteur on the promotion 
and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression,  the UN Special Rapporteur 
on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering 
terrorism as well as the PEGA Committee have called for stricter  regulation of surveillance 
exports and restrictions on their use and for an immediate moratorium on the global sale and 
transfer of the tools of the private surveillance industry until rigorous human rights safeguards 
are put in place.23  
 
▪ Putting in plac e rigorous human rights safeguards  
 
(a) Exporting States should join the Wassenaar Arrangement and abide by its rules and 
standards to the extent that these are consistent with international human rights law.24 
(b) States participating in the Wassenaar Arrangement  should develop a framework by 
which the licensing of any technology would be conditional upon a national human 
rights review and companies’ compliance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights.25 
(c) States and companies should set clear and  enforceable guidelines on transparency and 
accountability with respect to licensing decisions, surveillance -related human rights 
abuses and the treatment of vulnerabilities.26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [2], [66(a)]; Use of spyware to surveil journalists and human 
rights defenders , Statement by UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet,  19 July 2021, 
https://www.ohchr.org/en/ 2021/07/use -spyware -surveil -journalists -and-human -rights -defendersstatement -un-
high-commissioner ; Human rights implications of the development, use and transfer of new technologies in the 
context of counter -terrorism (not e 1) [48]; PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [586] -[587].  
24 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [66].  
25 Reinforcing media freedom and the safety of journalists in the digital age (note 12) [124].  
26 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [66].  
 8 
C. States’ Obligations under the Global Human Rights Framework  
 
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) protects everyone’s rights 
to privacy, opinion and expression. Article 17(1) of the ICCPR provides that ‘[n]o one shall be 
subjec ted to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or 
correspondence’. The right to privacy functions as a gateway right protecting and enabling 
many other rights and freedoms , including the right to freedom of expression or the right  to 
political participation.27 Article 19 of the ICCPR protects everyone’s right to hold opinions 
without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, 
regardless of frontiers and through any media.  
 
The limitation of bo th the right to privacy and the right to freedom of expression is subject to 
a three -part test, namely that:   
(a) restrictions must be provided by law;  
(b) restrictions must be imposed only when serving one of the exhaustively 
enumerated legitimate reasons provide d in Articles 17 and 19 ICCPR; and  
(c) restrictions must be necessary and proportionate.  
 
State parties to the ICCPR are under the obligation to provide in law and practice necessary 
safeguards, oversight and scrutiny mechanisms, and means of redress with regard to the use of 
spyware.28  
 
1. Reinforcing Safeguards in National Legislation  
States deploying surveillance tools must ensure that they do so in accordance with a domestic 
legal framework that meets the standards required by international human rights law.29 
(a) Any legislation governing surveillance must be clear, foreseeable, precise and publicly 
accessible.  
(b) Surveillance should only be authorised in law for the most serious criminal offences.  
 
27 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [24]; Human rights implications of the development, use and 
transfer of new technologies in the context of counter -terrorism (note 1) [45].  
28 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) 6.  
29 See in detail, Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [50]; PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [588].  
 9 
(c) Privileged professions, such as lawyers, journalists, politicians, and doctors, shall not 
be targeted by spyware.30 
(d) States should develop and implement national action plans, based on human rights 
obligations and tailored to online as well as offline issues, to advance the freedom, 
independence a nd pluralism of the media; set up prevention and protection mechanisms 
for the safety of journalists; and promote awareness about human rights standards and 
best practices.  In this regard, States should consult with civil society and journalists’ 
organi sations in developing, monitoring and assessing their national action plans in a 
transparent and inclusive way.31 
 
2. Requirements for Authorising Spyware Surveillance Operations  
A surveillance operation must be approved for use against a specific person only i n accordance 
with international human rights law and when authorised by a competent, independent and 
impartial judicial body, with all appropriate limitations on time, manner, place and scope of 
the surveillance.32 
(a) A surveillance operation must be authorised by a competent, independent and impartial 
judicial body.   
(b) Surveillance requests should only be permitted in accordance with regular, documented 
legal processes and the issuance of warrants for such use. Surveill ance requests should 
include all available information.  
(c) Given the fact that spyware allows for retroactive access to messages, files and 
metadata, the surveillance request, the judicial approval of authorisation of said request 
and any ensuing warrants ne ed to define the precise scope of the operation and what 
information is allowed to be accessed.  
(d) A surveillance operation should only last as long as is strictly necessary. Prior judicial 
authorisation should accordingly define the temporal scope of the ope ration.  
(e) Law enforcement and judicial authorities have the obligation to use a version of 
spyware that is programmed in such a way that it minimi ses access to data. The spyware 
should not have access to all data stored on a device, but should be programmed in such 
a way that it limits access to data to the minimum of what is strictly necessary.  
 
30 Reinforcing media freedom and the safety of journalists in the digital age (note 12) [123]; PEGA Draft Report 
(note 4) [588(k)].  
31 Reinforcing media fre edom and the safety of journalists in the digital age (note 12) [105] -[106].  
32 See in detail, Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [50]; PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [588].  
 10 
(f) Specific provision and appropriate resources should be made for law enforcement and 
judicial authorities to have access to independent technological expertise concern ing 
the use of different types and version s of spyware.   
(g) When assessing the necessity and proportionality of a surveillance operation, it is the 
State that has the burden of proving that a given restriction imposed to a human right is 
the least intrusive instrument among those that might achieve the same function.  
 
3. Strict Assessment of “National Security” as the Basis for a Spyware Surveillance 
Operation  
In the area of targeted surveillance, it is commonplace for States to seek to justify restrictions 
impo sed on the rights of individuals on the basis of national security.33 The mere reference to 
national security is not sufficient. States need to be able to demonstrate that a threat to 
national security is genuine, present or foreseeable  in order to justify  serious interferences 
with human rights.34 Therefore, judges and courts should not grant excessive and/or baseless 
deference to perceived national security and law enforcement interests.  
 
4. Notification of Individuals Placed under Targeted S urveillance  
Individual targets of surveillance are often not aware of the surveillance being carried out 
against them.  Being notified of such surveillance is a necessary precondition for individuals to 
be able to exercise their rights.35 
(a) Individuals placed  under targeted s urveillance have the right to be notified without 
undue delay, unless an independent judicial authority grants delay of such notification  
because it  would seriously jeopardise the purpose of said surveillance . 
(b) The notification of a surveil lance operation should include information regarding the 
date and duration of the surveillance; the warrant issued for the surveillance operation; 
data obtained; information on how that data has been used and by which actors; and the 
date of deletion of th e data.  
(c) The notification  of a surveillance operation should notify the individual placed under 
targeted s urveillance of their rights and remedies available pursuant to law.  
 
 
33 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2)  [24].  
34 E.g., Court of Justi ce of the European Union, La Quadrature du Net and Others , C-511/18, C -512/18 and C -
520/18, 6 October 2020 [156]. PEGA Draft Report (ntoe 4) [429], [589] -[590].  
35 See in detail, Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [50]; PEGA Draft Report (note 4)  [588].  
 11 
5. Effective and Independent Ex -post Oversight   
(a) There must be effective and independent oversight over the use of spyware by public 
authorities.  
(b) Independent oversight bodies shall have all required means and powers to exercise 
meaningful oversight.  
(c) Parliamentary oversight bodies shall have cross -party  membership and full access to 
information.36 
 
6. Effective and Meaningful Legal Remedies for Targeted Surveillance  
Article 2(3)(a) of the ICCPR imposes an obligation to provide victims of violations with access 
to an effective remedy.  
 
Victims of targeted surveillance have had little success in their efforts to obtain recognition of 
the harm suffered, let alone remedi es for s aid harm.37 Victims are refused access to information, 
even regarding the charges against them that supposedly justified their surveillance. 
Prosecutors, judges and law enforcement refuse to investigate and often put the burden of proof 
on the vict ims, expecting them to prove they have been targeted with spyware.38 Due to the 
nature of spyware and the little to no traces left behind after its use, it is difficult for victims to 
prove the existence of a surveillance operation or attribute a surveilla nce operation to State 
actors. Access to (technical) expertise and resources in order to be able to demonstrate the 
aforementioned are factors to be seriously considered.39 
(a) Individuals who claim to be adversely affected by surveillance should have access t o 
redress through an independent (judicial) oversight body which will conduct a swift, 
thorough and impartial investigation.  
(b) Legal remedies must be effective in both law and practice and they must be known and 
accessible.  
(c) Effective legal remedies require that the oversight body will be mandated to end on -
going violations.  
(d) When alleged violations are of a grave nature, criminal prosecution should be 
required.40 
 
36 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [588(f)].  
37 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [40].  
38 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) 6.  
39 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [54].  
40 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [588(g)].  
 12 
(e) During the surveillance operation, authorities should delete all irrelevant data , 
pursuant to the scope of the judicial authorisation of said operation. After the 
surveillance operation and the investigation for which the authorisation was granted 
ceases, authorities should delete the data as well as any related documents, such as notes 
that were taken during that period. The deletion must be recorded, and the se records 
should be auditable.41 
(f) The States’ duty to provide effective remedies also entails an ob ligation to protect 
individuals from acts by private sector entities that cause infringements, by exercising 
due diligence to prevent, punish, investigate or redress the harm caused by such acts by 
private persons or entities.42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 PEGA Draft Report (note 4) [588(h)].  
42 Surveillance and human rights report (note 2) [39].  
 13 
Appendix 1 : Key commitments, pledges, or actions that should be taken by 
different stakeholders – governments, private sector, civil society  
 
1. States need to subject the authorisation and use of spyware to rigorous safeguards  that 
meet the standards required by international human rights law.  
 
2. States should not target by spyware privileged professions, such as lawyers, journalists, 
politicians, and doctors.  
 
3. States should uphold media freedom and the safety of journalists in the digital age.  
 
4. States should develop and implement national action plans, based on human rights 
obligations to advance the freedom, independence and pluralism of the media.  
 
5. A surveillance operation must be approved for use against a specific person only in  
accordance with international human rights law and when authorised by a competent, 
independent and impartial judicial body, with all appropriate limitations on time, 
manner, place and scope of the surveillance.  
 
6. National authorities have the obligation to  notify without undue delay  individuals that 
were placed under targeted s urveillance , unless an independent judicial authority grants 
delay of such notification.  
 
7. States should put in place effective and independent oversight mechanisms over the use 
of spyware.  
 
8. States need to provide individuals who claim to be adversely affected by surveillance 
access to legal and effective redress.  
 
9. States should not invoke in an excessive manner national security as a basis to justify 
the use of spyware . 
 
10. Law enforce ment and judicial authorities have the obligation to use a version of 
spyware that is programmed in such a way that it minimises access to data.  
 
11. The States’ duty to provide effective remedies also entails an obligation to protect 
individuals from acts by  private sector entities that cause infringements, by exercising 
due diligence to prevent, punish, investigate or redress the harm caused by such acts by 
private persons or entities.  
 
12. States should agree upon an immediate moratorium on the export, sale, transfer, use or 
servicing of privately developed surveillance tools  until a human rights -compliant 
safeguards regime is in place.   
 14 
 
13. States should revise the Wassenaar Arrangement by making it binding and embedding 
rigorous human rights safeguards and processes.  
 
14. Companies that produce spyware should set clear and enforceable guidelines on 
transparency and accountability with respect to licensing decisions, su rveillance -related 
human rights abuses and the treatment of vulnerabilities.  
 
 
 
Appendix 2 : Core principles that all governments, companies, civil society 
organisations and other stakeholders should adhere to  
 
1. The authorisation and use of spyware  should be subject to rigorous human rights 
safeguards.  
 
2. Privileged professions, such as lawyers, journalists, politicians, and doctors , should not 
be targeted by spyware.  
 
3. Media freedom and the safety of journalists needs to be upheld in the digital age.  
 
4. The use of spyware should be subject to necessary safeguards, provided in law and 
practice; oversight and scrutiny mechanisms; and means of redress.  
 
5. Targeted, covert surveillance tools must be deployed in accordance with a domestic 
legal fra mework that meets the standards required by international human rights law.  
 
6. A surveillance operation must be approved for use against a specific person only in 
accordance with international human rights law and when authorised by a competent, 
independent and impartial judicial body, with all appropriate limitations on time, 
manner, place and scope of the surveillance . 
 
7. Individuals placed under targeted s urveillance have the right to be notified without 
undue delay, unless an independent judicia l authority grants delay of such notification  
if it would seriously jeopardise the purpose of the surveillance . 
 
8. There must be effective and independent oversight by public authorities over the use of 
spyware.  
 
9. Individuals who claim to be adversely affect ed by surveillance should have access to 
legal and effective redress through an independent (judicial) oversight body which will 
conduct a swift, thorough and impartial investigation.  
 
 15 
10. National security should not be invoked in an excessive and/or baseless  fashion to 
justify the use of s pyware.  
 
11. An immediate moratorium needs to be imposed on the export, sale, transfer, use or 
servicing of privately developed surveillance tools  until a human rights -compliant 
regime is in place.   
 
12. The Wassenaar Arrangement needs to be revised by embedding rigorous human rights 
safeguards and processes.  
 
13. Clear and enforceable guidelines on transparency and accountability with respect to 
licensing decisions, surveillance -related human rights abuses and t he treatment of 
vulnerabilities need to be set for companies  that produce spyware.  
 
 
 