 
1 
 
 
 
ETNO contribution to consultation on Global Digital Compact  
 
The European Telecommunications Network Operators’ Association (ETNO) represents the telecoms network 
operators in Europe. ETNO members represent over 68% of the investment into Europe’s telecoms networks, 
the fixed and wireless connectivity which underpins our economy and society, and which is driving the twin 
green and digital transition.  
ETNO has long been involved in global digital leadership, playing a key rol e at the Internet Governance Forum 
(IGF) and engaging with the International Telecommunication Union , Council of Europe, and the institutions of 
the European Union.  
Section 1 – general comments   
ETNO strongly welcomes the initiative of the United  Nations and the Secretary General to propose a Global 
Digital Compact, as a key high -level track of the Summit of the Future, which recognises the vital role which 
digital technology and the internet play s in the economy and society of the future. Already today, digital 
technologies are driving the transition to a more sustainable society.  
We strongly support the adoption and signing by many countries of the Declaration for the Future of the 
Internet. The  Declaration sets out a positive and ambitious vision, which views the internet and digital 
technologies as a powerful enabler of positive change, including for combatting climate change, supporting 
economic growth in the context of a global digital econom y which fosters trade and contestable online markets, 
and ensures the internet is safe and secure, built on trust. The Declaration rightly recognises that, with the right 
conditions and principles, “the internet can deliver on the promise of connecting humankind and helping societies and democracies to thrive.”   
We would like to underline the importance of the involvement of the full multistakeholder community 
throughout the entire Global Digital Compact process , beyond this initial consultation. While adop ted among 
governments at the United  Nations, the Global Digital Compact will be implemented by private sector, civil 
society, technical community and governments – as such, the full community must be involved in its drafting.  
  
 
2 
 
Section 2 – thematic input  
Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
Connecting all people to the internet requires effective action on all three layers of the ICT ecosystem: accessible 
and trustworthy  infrastructure and devices ; appropriate applications and services  built on the infrastructure; 
and digital skills .  
This require s policymaking based  on two basic principles:  
1. Public policies  and regulat ions sh ould promote the value of the entire communications and digital 
services ecosystem  
2. Policies should promote competition , being  technology -neutral, and supportive of innovative business 
models  
In 2021,  the UN Broadband Commission Working Group established a s a strategic recommendation to increase 
broadband deployment by “broadening the base” of stakeholders : increasing the number of stakeholders that 
will support projects to increase both broadband deployment and adoption – particularly  where market forces 
up to now have proven to be insufficient.  
 
The report highlights  the new realities of the digital economy in the 21st Century – more companies are creating 
value over existing network infrastructure beyond those who have traditionally invested in, funded, or financed 
such networks or contribute to extending universal service. In addition, there are new players building and 
investing in new infrastructure, often in partnership with traditional players. The report also notes that 
broadening the base co uld create innovative and sustainable business models for the provisioning and use of 
broadband service  that address the challenging problem of extending broadband connectivity to underserved 
and often challenging areas.  
 Furthermore, the Declaration on the Future of the Internet  establishes a number of important principles in this 
regard:  
• Inclusive and reliable access to the Internet should be available for individuals and businesses and 
efforts to close digital divides should be undertake n to ensure everyone can benefit from the digital 
transformation – and rely on the principles of protecting  individuals’ privacy, their personal data, the 
confidentiality of electronic communications and information on end -users’ electronic devices, 
consis tent with the protection of public safety and applicable domestic and international law  
• Digital literacy, skills acquisition, and development should be supported so that individuals can overcome the digital divide, participate in the Internet safely, and r ealize the economic and social 
potential of the digital economy  
• Cultural diversity and multilingual content should be fostered, as well as social and digital inclusion within society, resilience to disinformation and misinformation, and participation in de mocratic 
processes  
KEY COMMITMENTS  
It is essential that all the actors of the internet ecosystem, with the support of governments and regulators , 
ensure  the right competitive  and regulatory environment  maintaining trust in electronic communication 
services , contribute  to support the deployment of next generation connectivity and reduce the digital divide. 
Industry leaders, stakeholders and policymakers need to engage in dialogue where this is not the ca se, to ensure 
that regulatory asymmetry, market distortions or other factors do not limit this ability, and that the right incentives for digital infrastructure investment are in place to support the long -term growth of the ecosystem. 
 
3 
 
Different approaches may be appropriate in different markets to address any market imbalances , however, the 
ultimate goal is nevertheless the same: to deliver and sustain digital connectivity — for everyone — for decades 
to come.  
This includes:  
1. Building a common  vision and goals to provide the digital infrastructure  that will connect all people to 
the Internet. However, this demands  policies that promote a balanced digital ecosystem to ensure the 
sustainability of network investments.  
2. Facilitating investment  and promot ing innovative financing models  for the deployment broadband 
services and connectivity across the entire digital value chain . To promote remote and rural 
connectivity  – specifically schools – policies should aim at reducing cost of deploying broadband access.  
3. Ensuring that the a llocation and licensing of spectrum  should be transparent, fair, economically 
efficient, technology -neutral, and aimed at ensuring the availability of sufficient broadband- capable 
spectrum.  
A number of ETNO members have signed up to the initiative of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
Partner2Connect , which is a multistakeholder alliance with the objective of fostering meaningful connectivity 
and digital transformation globally . Such an initiative can provide an important framework for commitments of 
private sector, civil society and public bodies. In this context, some members commitments include, inter alia:  
• Commitment to invest for connectivity, to increase voice and data cov erage  
• Education and training for a safe and responsible use of digital technology (including parents’ use for child protection), and training to develop skills required to use digital tools  
• Development of the appropriate regulatory and taxation environments to foster connectivity, digital 
literacy and inclusion   
In addition, a number of ETNO members have made specific commitments to reduce the digital divide and 
improve digital equality, such as ensuring connectivity for all, providing inclusive offers an d affordable devices, 
and helping people improve their digital skills. An example of this is the Orange commitment to digital equality
. 
Similarly , Telefónica published a Rural Manifesto , a proposal for developing inclusive and sustainable rural 
networks , bringing together  public and private efforts un der a collaborative approach, and focusing on a new 
model that revolves around three main axes: innovation, cooperation and sustainability.  
With respect to the exploration of new investment models , and in line with the recommendations of the UN 
Broadband Commission’s report , governments should  develop mechanisms to create the appropriate  
incentives and reforms to enable contributors to make even more investments.  
  
 
4 
 
Avoid internet fragmentation  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
The functioning of an open, interconnected and interoperable internet can be undermined due to unintended 
consequences of technical, legislative, regulatory and policy developments that have an impact on the different  
layers of the Internet.  Such threats inclu de government -mandated internet shutdowns, the proliferation of 
cybercrime and low cybersecurity standards, and policies aimed at controlling access to the internet or 
conducting surveillance on the general public. Consideration should also be given to the  possible technical 
fragmentation of the internet, which puts into question the interoperability and interconnectedness of the 
global internet.  
As guiding principles, each actor in the multistakeholder community should commit to  preventing internet 
shutdo wns, ensuring common technological standards for the Internet architecture , the global free -flow of 
information, developing and promoting high standards of cybersecurity  and confidence on the internet, and 
preserving the multistakeholder  model of internet governance.  
KEY COMMITMENTS  
ETNO members take the commitment to the open internet seriously, in the understanding that a fragmented 
internet and low cybersecurity standards leads to a lower level of trust in the internet and digital technologies – for individuals, businesses, governments and society at large.   
Our members s upport the Internet Governance Forum Policy Network on Internet Fragmentation (IPNF). This 
multistakeholder coalition aims to offer a systematic a nd comprehensive framework  to define Internet  
fragmentation, its intended and unintended causes,  and its potential effects; to collect and analyze case studies 
to fine- tune and complement this f ramework and to establish shared principles, recommendations or codes of 
conduct that prevent  fragmentation and preserve the open, interconnected and interoperable nature of the 
Internet.  
Internet shutdowns , including government -mandated shutdowns, are det rimental to trust in the internet and 
digital economy, to human rights, and to the economic prospects of individuals, businesses, countries and regions. Our members are strongly opposed to such measures, and any restrictions to internet access must be firmly grounded in international law, and have a legitimate legal basis.  
With regard to cybersecurity , our  members invest major resources in cybersecurity research and resilience 
measures
 to contribute to a robust cybersecurity environment, to protect the integrity and security of our 
networks themselves, and the data carried on those networks.  Our members are engaged in a number of 
initiatives such as t he International Communications CISO Council (ICCC) , which brings  together telecoms 
associations and major national ISPs, to exchange ideas and information, and contribute to enhancing cybersecurity globally.   
  
 
5 
 
Protect data  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
The international transfer of data is an inherent part of the functioning of the world economy and social 
exchanges. In fact, organizations from all sectors, whether public or private, multinationals and SMEs, rely 
heavily on the possibility of transferring personal data in order to provide their services. Today, virtually no organization, regardless of sector, could engage in international trade without the ability to transfer data across 
borders. Data flows play an  invisible but structural role in delivering products and services to citizens in their 
daily lives.  The Global Digital Compact should recognis e that establishing  and maintaining  trust , and minimising 
disruptions in data flows are fundamental to reaping the benefits of digitalisation.  The Compact should call for  
the removal of  unjustified obstacles to cross -border data flows , and encourage global cooperation and 
interoperability across policy and regulatory systems on data governance matters.  
Citizens and companies need sustainable solutions in light of today’s globalized economy and society, where 
international transfers of data are not an exception, but the general rule.  A fundamental cornerstone of trust in 
the internet and digital technologies is the assurance that personal and other data is protected, both by a robust cybersecurity infrastructure, and a trustworthy legal framework for data protection. To ensure a trustworthy 
digital ecosystem, and guarantee that business can operate based o n a clear legal framework across borders, 
governments and legislators should ensure that the policy and regulatory environments for data protection and data access are up -to-date and reflect the best practices in respect of privacy and security. The lack of 
interoperability across jurisdictions can create needless administrative burdens and compliance inconsistencies, which limits the potential of the global digital economy.  
KEY COMMITMENTS  
ETNO members maintain the highest standards of data protection, as enshrined in European legislation, in 
particular the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and ePrivacy Directive. We  are committed to the 
protection of personal data, including when it is transferred across borders. It is incumbent upon companies to 
implement their legal obligations to protect privacy and security of data, across the entire processing lifecycle or locations of processing.  
The European Union has established a robust framework of data protection and access to data, with the twin aim of ensuring that the data of individuals, businesses and governments are protected; but also to give the possibility of using data to harness the potential of technology in driving the green transition, and develop 
citizen -centric public service s: the right balance should be struck between the ability to innovate, the protection 
of trade secrets and investments into the data economy, and the protection of individuals’  personal data , 
through the application of data protection by design, data protection impact assessments, and technical 
safeguards such as pseudonymization and encryption.  
In this context , it is  important to highlight that OECD countries recently adopted the first intergovernmental 
agreement on common approaches to safeguarding p rivacy and other human rights and freedoms when 
accessing personal data for national security and law enforcement purposes. The  
OECD  Declaration  on 
Government  Access  to Personal  Data  Held  by Private  Sector  Entities  s eeks to improve trust in cross -border data 
flows – which are central to the digital transformation of the global economy – by clarifying how national security 
and law en forcement agencies can access personal data under existing legal frameworks. It marks a major 
political commitment by the 38 OECD countries and the European Union that signed up to it during the OECD’s  
2022 Digital  Economy  Ministerial Meeting . The Declaration is also open for membership by other 
countries . This could be shared and proposed as a common framework on data flows and data privacy.  
  
 
6 
 
Apply human rights online  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
Rights that people have offline must also be protected online, in accordance with the rule of law and 
international human rights legal obligations.   
With respect to the right to freedom of expression and privacy, these should be appropriately balanced with regulation on dealing with illegal content online, from copyright infringements, to the most heinous content, such as terrorist content and child se xual abuse material. European Union law is based on the principle of a 
prohibition on the general monitoring of the internet , which ensures that measures employed to tackle illegal 
content are targeted and proportionate to achieving that aim, while not com promising the rights of citizens.  
KEY COMMITMENTS  
Decisions on Internet governance and policy issues on all levels should be consistent with international human rights. The Global Digital Compact should reiterate governments’ shared commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms and recognize that rights people have offline must be equally protected online.  
  
 
7 
 
Promote regulation of artificial intelligence  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
Artificial intelligence (AI) has enormous potential to transform our society and economy, harnessing the value 
of data to achieve efficiency gains and smart solutions, which will support in the twin green and digital transition. Governments and companies should promote innovative and trustworthy AI, which respects human rights and 
democratic values.  
These value- based principles refer to:  
• Stakeholders should proactively engage in responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI  in pursuit of 
beneficial outcomes for people and the planet , such as augmenting human capabilities and enhancing 
creativity, advancing inclusion of underrepresented populations, reducing economic, social, gender and 
other inequalities, and protecting natural environments, thus invigorating inclusive growth, sustainable 
development and well -being.  
• Developers and deployers of AI  should respect the rule of law , human rights  and democratic values , 
such  as freedom of expression , dignity and autonomy, privacy and data protection, non- discrimination 
and equality, diversity, fairness, social justice, and internationally recognised labour rights.  
• Developers and deployers of AI  should commit to transparency and responsible disclosure  regarding 
AI systems.  
• AI systems  should meet agreed standards of robustness , security  and safety , and should meet these 
standards when deployed, and throughout their entire lifecycle.  
• Developers and deployers of AI should be accountable for the proper functioning of AI systems.  
KEY COMMITMENTS  
ETNO is  actively engaged  in the Council of Europe’s work in drafting a framework convention on Artificial 
Intelligence, which will set binding rules on risk assessment and mitigation for AI in three key areas: human rights, democracy and t he rule of law.  
In addition, our members support the other legislative and non- legislative initiatives. The OECD principles, which 
have been endorsed by G20, are an important cornerstone for the approach to trustworthy AI, and should form the basis of int ernational initiatives on AI. The ongoing legislative work on an AI Act in the EU, underpinned by 
the European Commission’s AI Ethics Guidelines, will create a worldwide precedent. Developed on a risk based approach, it must ensure an appropriate balance between innovation and regulation.  
  
 
8 
 
About ETNO  
ETNO (European Telecommunications Network Operators ’ Association) represents Europe’s 
telecommunications network  operators and is the principal policy group for European electronic 
communications  network operators. ETNO’s primary purpose is to  promote a positive policy environment 
allowing the EU  telecommunications sector to deliver best quality services to  consumers  and businesses.  
For questions related to this contribution, please contact:  
 
Ross CREELMAN  
Public Policy Manager, ETNO  
creelman@etno.eu   