UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
 
Digital Literacy: The Great Divide  
 
Table of Contents  
Intro  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  1 
Consultation Brief for the Public Side of the UN Digital Compact  ................................ ................................ .. 2 
Summary of the meetings/discussions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  3 
Issue 1: Improvement of Digital  literacy  to prevent  further class divisions of societies within Europe and globally. Ensurin g 
regional cohesion and stronger economic growth via  digitalisation.  /target:  Ensuring digital inclusion for all, including 
the most vulnerable/  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 3 
Summary of Issue1 recommendations:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 5 
Issue 2: Digital Literacy and AI - the Dawning of a New Age of Digital Societies /target:  Supporting global cooperation on 
Artificial Intelligence/  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 5 
Summary of Issue2 recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 7 
Issue 3: Tackling democratization of digital innovations as a public good. /target:  Building a more effective architecture for 
digital cooperation/  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 7 
Summary of Issue3 recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 9 
Detailed Summary of Consultation Recommendation  ................................ ................................ .....................  9 
Co-authors of the recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 10 
 
 
 
Intro  
 
Digital literacy is a regionally defined  and culturally amplified topic, which concerns all nations and regions 
across the globe  to a varying degree.  While the speed of digitalization in the last couple of decades has 
improved the living standar ds and conditions in a variety of geographies across the globe, groups of people 
are left outside of the current wave of innovations. To mitigate this disparity, global entities, such as the UN 
could take a proactive stance to ensure that individuals with little or no digital literacy are up to par with the 
New Age of AI preventing further gaps in economic and lifestyle advancement.  
 
On 09.03.2023, Dr. Monika Manolova ( Digital National Alliance Bulgaria ) hosted a meeting in collaboration 
with Dr. Haydee Sh eombar ( Kankan*Tree ) and Jaisal Surana( MKAI.org ) to implement a consultation on the 
topic of “Digital Literacy: the Great Divide” with organizations and experts from North America, South 
America, Asia, Africa and Europe   
Each of these organizations was invited to determine the key pain points and potential solutions which could 
be implemented at a more global scale. The focus is on addressing three core issues concerning the UN Digital 
Cooperation Roadmap.  
 
On 28.03.2023 A second meeting was hosted to cover the aspects, which were not included in the previous 
meeting, to allow for confirmation of inputs and for fu rther suggestions - including calls for action to the 
UN. 

UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
  
The outcome of these two meetings supports the UN's aim for an inclusive and participatory process, managing 
to attract experts from a variety of countries, to voice a variety of issues in the digi tal realm . 
 
 
 
The consultation  was attended by experts from 25 countries:  
Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Ecuador, Eritrea, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Kenya, Mexico, Morocco, 
Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, Türkiye, UAE, UK, 
USA  
 
Consultation Brief for the Public Side of the UN Digital Compact  
 
DNA Bulgaria, Kankan* Tree,  and MKAI hosted a public consultation for the UN Digital Compact on the 
topic “Digital Literacy: The Great Divide”, which was attended by  over 40 experts from 2 5 countries . 
  
Conclusions of the consultation  
  
While the world is connecting through digitalization, the disconnected remain a majority. This inequity 
disempowers people, especially educators and students, and  creates social divisions.  
Regional differences are a significant factor in the analysis of digital literacy,  but geography is secondary as 
literacy is an issue even within large metropolitan areas. Access to basic services based on digitalization (such 
as transport, telecommunications,  and healthcare) is faced with barriers in the evolving digital context, 
affecting vulnerable groups and the elderly.  
  
Recommendations  
  
Education and literacy  
  
● Effective awareness campaigns for digital literacy (via mediators) should be done in remote areas in 
Africa, but also for rural areas in Eastern Europe ( e.g., Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, N. Macedonia), 
where people are unaware of opportunities created by technology. Awareness about digital literacy is 
also neede d in main cities of several African countries, mainly Sub-Saharan  countries.  
● Methodologies encouraging augmented education, higher order thinking skills and multimodal 
learning  should be developed for all social groups and regional extremes ( e.g., Italy, most African 
countries), to deal with the high speed of digital evolutions ( e.g., ChatGTP).  
● A “cultural invite” approach is needed, because while certain parts of the world integrate AI literacy 
to preserve jobs and upskill ( e.g., Mexico), others perceive access to digital goods and services as an 
ethics issue.  
● Investments in user -friendly hardware are needed to prevent significant accessibility barriers (for 
children with disadvantages in e.g., UK, the elderly in e.g., Portugal and Belgium, children with 
disabilities e.g., Morocco).   
Economy  
● Digital education needs to include "informed consent" and "dynamic consent" for data use ( e.g., 
healthcare). Even for executives these may be concepts that require training( e.g., USA).  
● In the various stages of innovati on additional investment is needed to support upskilling SMEs which 
provide jobs. ( e.g., Philippines, Myanmar)  
● Trusted innovation networks should be established to demonstrate the advantages of digitalization to 
various segments of end -users ( e.g., digital  hubs approach in the EU)  
  
Digitalization  
● Digital literacy, skills, and divide must be clearly defined to support learning within growing evolving 
digital tools, ( e.g., AI). 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 ● Transparency, trust, representation, safety,  and security should be integrated in  convergence tech and 
digital strategies.  
● Regulatory and strategic frameworks in AI/XR should be developed and/or improved through global 
expert oversight and collaboration to establish a baseline standard for all stakeholders to comply with.  
● Collaboration  must  be established between education and economic segments to implement innovative 
digital standards (through global communities and initiatives).  
● Expansive digitalization must include environmental mitigation in alignment with CODES UN and 
should suppo rt educating the end users about the impacts of digitalization.  
 
 
Summary of the meetings/discussions  
 
The “Digital Literacy: the Great Divide” discussion was focused on a variety of issues from unequal access to 
internet services across the globe, unequal levels of education access and divergent understanding of the 
terminology of digital literacy with some regions in the world, age and demographic  groups facing computer 
knowledge gaps, others facing digital literacy gaps and others needing to come to terms with the inclusion of 
the term “AI Literacy '' in the compendium of terms within their digital literacy frameworks. (Dr. Mulugetha 
T. Solomon, Omdena Milan  - suggested a clear delineation between the terminologies to focus areas of 
expertise on sol ving the variety of problems – digital literacy, computer literacy and artificial intelligence ( AI)  
literacy)  
 
Issue 1: Improvement of Digital  literacy  to prevent  further class divisions of societies within Europe and 
globally. Ensuring regional cohesion  and stronger economic growth via  digitalization . /target:  Ensuring 
digital inclusion for all, including the most vulnerable/  
Background:  Africa leads the world in the percentage of the population without internet connection at 88 
percent. Furthermore, in the countries that are connected, male internet users outnumber their female 
counterparts in every region of the world.  
The ‘digital divide’ we face globally does not just signify those who have access to the internet and those who 
do not, the gap also en compasses several other discrepancies, including the quality of digital infrastructure in 
rural communities, the speed of connectivity in remote areas, and the training and skills required to navigate 
such technology.  
(Source: UNICEF ) 
The average % of Digital Skills in Europe is 31% and this % does not account for AI skills  
Intro by Dr. Haydee Shoembar, Kankan* Tree “Digital literacy is about navigating the technology and using 
it well. Digital literacy is a lot more than access to the internet. If we don’t get this right, we’ll leave a lot of 
people behind across the globe and the goal is “leave no one behind””  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/DISCUSSION  
 
USA Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive 2030  (Education 
and literacy ) provided insights into >350 schools in New York and the lack of capacity for some of the 
children in high school  age to access the internet – in one of the most highly developed cities in the world. 
Thus, outlining the existing divides even within developed countries which need to be brought to the attention 
of policy  makers as a  “social justice issue”  to ensure equ al career opportunities for children. Inequality exists 
both locally and in macro degrees.   
Belgium Laura Babío, POLIS Network, Brussels, Belgium (Education and literacy)  The massive wave of 
digitization  of transport has a huge impact – apps to access the t ransport services, to evaluate the service,  have 
quite a significant impact on social exclusion especially on the elderly. It is an issue of transport justice.  
Trying to keep the human factor as part of the system  was noted as highly valuable and importan t to keep 
things inclusive and intuitive. A variety of industries have already tackled digitalization successfully (banking), 
but transport is still in between .  
Portugal  Mónica Rogério, ACDIPE, Portugal (Education and literacy)  In rural areas in Portugal landline  
phones are still used due to lack of internet . Their recent project experiences show that elderly people are 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 excited and want to be included in the digital world, but they face a variety of issues, from lack of internet in 
rural areas to purely phy sical issues in interaction with touchscreen phones. An issue of age barriers 
throughout Europe was raised.  
UK Richard Foster -Fletcher, MKAI, UK (Economy)  Noted that recent experiences in digital literacy seminars 
conducted across the globe with a variety of governmental bodies(Philippines, Bermuda, Myanmar) and 
targeting SMEs, and organizations in the startup sphere, which ought to produce innovative outputs(patents, 
jobs, economic viability in sustainability) also struggle with digital literacy in  the frame of AI, which moves 
through these 3 stages – 1st stage “Awareness of these technologies and inspiration”(high level of interest), 
2nd stage “Use cases and design thinking”(medium level of interest), 3rd stage “Prototyping”(low level of 
interest).   Digital literacy in SMEs should be a focus of more interest in the 3rd stage of innovation.  
Nigeria, Daniel Opanubi, Omdena  (Educatio n and literacy ) - There are people so far removed from digital 
culture that they are unaware and uninterested in getting digital culture. Contribution needs to be made for 
people like that.  To get them aware of what  people are doing. Then there are people who lack access to the 
basic minimum. Some people do not even have access to a mobile phone. A sort of awareness needs to  be 
made, because there are people unaware of the opportunities which digital skills bring.  
Nigeria, Oluwaseun Wey, Nigeria Inter -Bank Settlement System, Nigeria (Education and literacy) agrees as 
in Nigeria - it also goes beyond driving awareness only. De ploying systems and infrastructures that promote 
digital literacy and inclusion is crucial. Also, affordability is another critical area to promote digital literacy 
and inclusion; if these people cannot afford to buy internet -enabled mobile phones and subs cribe to internet 
services, there will be no inclusion no matter how much awareness is done. This links to the number 1 
Millennium  Development Goal Another key area of recommendation to bridge this digital literacy gap in 
Nigeria and across Africa is Early  Literacy i.e., equipping schools with digital systems and internet services 
so that children in the most rural areas can be exposed early on to the concept of digitization.  
Bulgaria, Jasen Tanev, Digital National Alliance/CyberClub  (Education and literacy ) – Noted that his 
experience with recent projects with minorities in Samokov, Bulgaria have led him to believe that people need 
to travel around the country and there need to be moderators of “digital gateways” which need to transfer the 
knowledge to the communities, which have the lowest interest in advancing their own digital lite racy. 
UK, Jaisal Surana, MKAI (Education and literacy ) Noted that higher public investment in hardware 
technologies for vulnerable children and children with di sabilities will need to be increased to prevent further 
expansion of the gaps within the education system.  
Serbia,  Miloš Dimitrijević, University of Kragujevac, Serbia (Education and literacy)  - Many remote areas 
do not have access to the Internet, while only urban areas are covered by high -speed Internet. The level of 
digital skills in Serbia is lagging  the EU average. Digital literacy index in 2022 observed a decline. There is a  
gender  gap  in  digital  skills. These results point to the conclusion tha t policymakers should support  elderly, 
rural population, women, disabled persons, as the most vulnerable groups. Empowering  these groups  and 
increasing their digital literacy, which is  a  prerequisite  for  AI, would have an impact on the decrease of t he 
gender gap, increase of female entrepreneurs and reduction of poverty.  
South Africa,  Lavina Ramkissoon, Advisor African Union (Digitalization)  - Tech colonization is amplified 
through both offline and online, that prevents digital citizens participating in information and communications 
technology sectors due to infrastructure, politics,  or economic circumstances. We have a unique opportunity 
to co ntribute to the normative framework on equality, technology, innovation,  and education in the digital age. 
Examples include Digital Violence amongst youth, women,  and children.  
Australia,  Dr. Stephanie Camarena, Founder of Source Transitions (Education and literacy) Australia has a 
well-developed digital literacy program in a country where between 80 -100% of people have access to the 
internet and to both mobile and computers. Significant divide between regional and metropolitan literacy, 
between younger and older people, education levels still exist. One of the difficulties to be analyzed  is the 
fact that the starting point for digital literacy is so widely spread from little access and resources to highly 
developed levels of access therefore the priorities would be very different.  
Improved collaboration should come from forgetting about where we start from and to instead focus on the 
type of future we want to build. That would mean that different countries could work towards a preferred state 
and that develo ping countries could leapfrog to ways of integrating Tech unimpeded by existing power 
structures and existing infrastructures.  
 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 Summary of Issue1 recommendations:  
While digital literacy seems to be regionally oriented, geography alone is not the cause of digital disparity and 
illiteracy. It is important to recognize digital literacy as a social and resource inequality to support populations 
who are underserved. Rega rdless of their regions. F urther investment  in us able hardware needs to be 
implemented to prevent a significant barrier for children with disabilities in the UK , access  to basic services 
such as transport are also  faced with barriers in the digital contex t within Europe(Brussels, Portugal) that affect 
vulnerable groups and the elderly. The upskilling in SMEs in a variety of global territories(Philippines, 
Bermuda, Myanmar) should target additional value creation in the innovation stages to support local 
economies and bridge the gaps.  
Additional support and awareness are needed within the farthest removed areas in Africa where people are 
unaware of the opportunities, which digital skills provide, but such unawareness exists in small communities 
within countr ies like Bulgaria, requiring a “human interface” to the digital divide. Access  to the internet needs 
to be made a basic need covered by human rights.  
 
Issue 2: Digital Literacy and AI - the Dawning of a New Age of Digital Societies /target:  Supporting glo bal 
cooperation on Artificial Intelligence/  
Background: The ability to understand, use, monitor, and critically reflect on AI applications without 
necessarily being able to develop AI models themselves  is commonly referred to as being “AI literate” (Long 
et al., 2021; Ng et al., 2021a).  
Some nations which are speeding up their AI strategies and developments will permanently increase the gap 
between nations – making some regions AI developing; others AI developed. The world map is being reshaped 
by these pro cesses which is why a global collaboration on AI should be implemented and supported.  
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/03/without -universal -ai-litera cy-ai-will-fail-us/ 
Jaisal  Surana, MKAI UK: “Corporations and nations are increasing and accelerating their investments in AI 
and how are various sectors going to be affected by the investment, should we consider that th e UN needs to 
consider changes in the SDGs. The unifications in definitions and standards happening in the background 
might be valuable but there ought to be a consideration for long -term strategies across the space.”  
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/DISCUSSION  
 
Peru,  Andres Leon -Geyer, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUCP  (Digitaliza tion) Outlined that 
there are groups which have access to the internet but have no literacy and there are areas with lack of access 
to the internet. For Peru “the unconnect ed” are not an exception but a majority.  Exclusion has a strong effect 
on the economies – such as the purchase power compared to Geneva. Digital literacy needs to be clearly 
defined for everyone and as  we introduce new definitions such as “AI literacy” we need to be cognizant that 
access to the goods and services  of the internet is an ethical issue.  
Italy, Oleg Missikoff, Earth 3.0 Foundation (Education and lite racy)  as an expert in digitalization for Africa 
and Europe, Oleg noted that there are extremes of access and purchasing  power. Mobile internet usage in 
Africa compared to the internet usage in Europe is quite expensive and unsustainable. But, on the other hand, 
there  are people in the world wondering how to deal with ChatGPT -4(noted as the other extrem e). The solution 
to the problem is in “knowledge” so that people can take advantage of the digital economy and adaptive 
learning, upskilling across the entire spectrum from low educated to highly educated, who have learned under 
outdated school curriculums  that no longer serve the current economic needs.  
South Africa,  Jessica Gardner, Worth Marketing Solutions  (Digitalization)   noted that access to the internet 
may indeed be a challenge due to things such as cost of internet (mobile and uncapped) and loadsh edding of 
electricity in long intervals. Oftentimes there are barriers in developing solutions for the startup economy due 
to cultural disparity and lack of inclusion within funding the digital innovation sphere.  
Ecuador,  Maria Mac Andrew, Executive Direct or My Zalu/AIEthics.World  (Education and literacy)  shared 
recent experiences in working with educators who are reluctant to introduce digital technologies in Africa due 
to pessimism that  the social divides, which exist, may  be bridged . Such pessimism woul d preclude students 
in rural schools in Africa (Zimbabwe) from being able to understand what a computer is, due to lack of basic 
access to technologies(a single computer). So, while there are currently ICT topics in education programmes 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 for far -removed are as, there need to be “creative and inspirational” programmes for the teachers themselves, 
so that they may introduce digital skills to the far removed. Storytelling and prioritizing teacher education 
will be fundamental for the solution of these challenges.  
USA, Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive  (Education and 
literacy)  noted that there are areas in the world(the Amazon) where digital education is perceived by local 
communities of native culture as im position(due to anxiety of learning and unlearning). There needs to be a 
holistic  approach and understanding for the issues not only from  the “hierarchy of need” perspective, but 
from  a “hierarchy of emotions”  perspective.  
Bulgaria, Monika Manolova, Digit al National Alliance  (Education and literacy)  Noted that some people in 
rural areas(farmers in  particular) do not believe that “digital is a solution to their problems” and 
rational /psychological reasons exist for that which need to be considered at least regarding education 
systems.  
Mexico, Victor M. Larios, Universidad de Guadalajara, CUCEA Smart Cities Innovation Center,  
(Digitalization)   in Latin America,  in Mexico, in there have been extensive investments in AI Ethics, but it 
is still difficult to ma tch the regulation with the applications of the technology, and the velocity with which 
some people may lose their occupation when certain applications of artificial intelligence are introduced. 
Within Mexico there are 70% people with access to the interne t, but it is mostly utilized for social networks 
and there needs to be a guided approach to the application and deployment of artificial intelligence, which 
secures jobs and provides people with access to higher levels  of digital skills.  
Bulgaria,  Monika Manolova, Digital National Alliance  (Digitalization)  noted that there are significant 
regional divisions in the world – with some areas facing difficulties in the bare minimum of access to the 
internet and then there are those already dealing with concepts  such as AI and XR.  
Netherlands,  Haydee Shoembar, Kankan*Tree, Netherlands (Digitalization)   suggested a further discussion 
of the ethical elements,  where technological advancement should not be imposed on people, but at the same 
time we run the risk of co ntinuously leaving people behind with the current speed of digital growth.  
USA, Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive 2030 (Education 
and literacy)  noted that the soft skills approach of “inviting” people to join in the digital evolutions might 
alleviate some of the “wicked problem” facets of the digitalization issue, where some populations may not 
want to be digitized.  
Serbia, Miloš Dimitrijević, University of Kragujevac (Digitalization)  - According to FAO, the world 
population will reach over 9 billion by 2050, so we need more productive systems, which will at the same 
time protect the environment and optimize the use of resources. AI holds promise in addressing the challenges 
of this new paradigm. AI in the agr icultural sector offers the potential to feed an ever -growing global 
population and contribute to the achievement of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Because of 
that we need global support to build a long -term framework and strategy. Internatio nal organizations must 
adopt a unique framework in this segment, building some global platform for collaboration, as well as 
encourage innovative food hubs and guide FinTech companies in this area.  
The introduction of AI in agriculture, and other economi c sectors, will be enabled by technological advances, 
including big data analytics, robotics, the Internet of Things, the availability of low -cost sensors and cameras, 
drone technology, and even widespread Internet coverage in geographically dispersed fiel ds. FinTech 
companies should be encouraged to introduce technological innovations (precision agriculture). Special 
attention should be directed towards technological innovations for small farms, bearing in mind the costs of 
their introduction as a major ob stacle.  
South Africa,  Lavina Ramkissoon, Advisor African Union (Education and literacy)  Digital literacy will be 
key in a world transformed by AI, therefore digital literacy must be taken seriously.  A beginning point is how 
to implement these skills in ou r social practices and bring these ideas into legislation. Today's adolescents are 
transitioning from childhood to adulthood in an era of rapid digitalization  in nanoseconds. Digital media are 
accessed through mobile phones, tablets, and computers and rema in an important window into the world for 
adolescents. While levels of digital access and experiences of the digital world vary widely, adolescents are 
typically among the highest users of digital media. Young people often rely on smartphones to go online,  but 
one third of school age children also have a fixed internet connection at home. Younger people also tend to 
spend more time online than older generations, by simple default education and awareness is critical inclusion 
into countries education policie s. 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 India,  Vibhav Mithal, IPR lawyer, Anand and Anand   to achieve global collaboration on AI, it is critical to 
first appreciate that AI, as on date, is a pattern recognition tool, which when combined with existing processes, 
helps humans achieve certain pr e-determined and pre -defined objectives. AI which functions as a tool (known 
as Artificial Narrow Intelligence) has to be clearly distinguished from the aspirational goal of AI becoming as 
'intelligent' as a human (a concept known as Artificial General Int elligence). Understanding this distinction 
would be an important step in promoting Digital Literacy and AI.  A facet of AI ethics, on the other hand, 
concerns the ethical choices which humans make while developing AI systems. If one is looking to achieve 
global collaboration on AI, then we must be on the same page as to the meaning of AI as well as the impact 
AI systems may have. For example, the draft EU AI Act seeks to regulate the impact of an AI system by 
focusing only on the use of AI Systems and by in troducing a risk categorization framework for such systems. 
However, The EU AI Act is only one approach to look at the impact of AI systems, and countries should be 
free to choose a mechanism that suits them the best.  Only from this basic agreement of the  meaning of AI 
and the impact that AI systems may create, can we then have subsequent discussions of how the path to achieve 
global collaboration will unfold.  
Summary of Issue2 recommendations  
The unconnected in some areas in the world are a majority and not a minority(Peru, South Africa) which 
creates cultural and social divisions, leading to pessimism even for educators(Zimbabwe) where digital 
literacy is concerned. Adaptive learning, knowledge, and creativity for all social groups from and regional 
extremes needs to be introduced, due to the speed with which current education systems are becoming 
redundant in the face of AI(Earth 3.0, Italy, Africa).  
Rather than a swift and forceful digital inclusion a cultural invite approach should be implemented. And while 
certain parts of the world recognize and implement AI literacy to preserve jobs and upskill(Mexico), others 
view the access to the goods and services of the internet as a digital ethics issue.  
 
Issue 3: Tackling democratization of d igital innovations as a public good. / Target : Building a more effective 
architecture for digital cooperation/  
Background: Digital innovations are siloed off and split i n regions, geographies, and spheres. While the 
competitive nature of the digital market provides goods and services at better/competitive/ quality, 
collaboration, it is bridging differences, providing access which will support the betterment of everyone’s 
future – democratic values, shared standards, improved collaboration, improved markets.  
Global corporate investment in AI has reportedly reached US$60 billion in 2020 and is projected to 
more than double by 2025.  
https://www.brookings.edu/research/strengthening -international -cooperation -on-ai/ 
Into by Dr. Monika Manolova:  “There are economic framework and regional framework s currently 
developed across the globe(example – India’s AI strategies target the protection of jobs, China’s AI strategies 
target further economic growth and expansion of production), which define the future of Artificial Intelligence 
and digital literacy  and place us on “ rails’ ‘with  very little room for collaboration and inclusion. To 
democratize digital and artificial Intelligence innovation for the good of all, it is necessary to engage stakeholders 
from other underrepresented regions ”  
 
RECOMMENDATION S/DISCUSSION  
 
Peru, Andres Leon -Geyer, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUCP  (Digitalization)  The 
democratization of digital goods and services needs to be approached from the perspective of a large -scale 
education programme (from the UN), which will help the terminology of AI to be better understood and not 
cause people to be misled.  
UK, Jaisal Surana, MKAI  (Digitalization)  People often understand computers and technology but not AI, 
there needs to be additional awareness about what AI appl ications capture and how they use and reuse  it. At 
the same time tackling democratization could be supported by the inclusion of experts from a variety of expert 
fields in the development of regulations and to support the commonalities between the policies  as the variety 
of countries analyze the problems within countries.  Further collaboration between tech experts and legal 
experts is necessary to support the collaboration between the frameworks.  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 Netherlands,  George Beers, Wageningen University  (Econo my) the speed of digitalization is higher than the 
traditional approaches to bringing innovations to society. Within the field of agriculture trust is a fundamental 
issue, where the utilization of digital technology is concerned. The establishment of excellence centers, centers 
of expertise and digital innovation hubs has shown to be successful due to the trust placed on local experts 
that are well -equipped to support bringing  the new technology to the farmers. Demonstration of the new 
technology close to the peo ple you want to impact is of the most importance. While technological  
advancements are incredibly important, they can be a “zero -sum” game and it is important to address the 
downside as well as the advantages.  
USA , Dr. Ingrid Vasiliu Feltes, Founder & CEO Institute for Science, Entrepreneurship,  and Investments ,  
(Economy)  Noted  that increased education efforts are required to optimize the level of global digital literacy 
and digit al fluency  related to the use of digital products and services solutions are crucial for success. 
Additio nally, there needs t o be a greater collaborative effort to  integrat e AI impact metrics, with  financial, 
operational, ESG(environmental , social and governance)  metrics as there are currently numerous silos that 
cause cyber -ethics vulnerabilities. Harmonization  and integrat ion have the potential to restore societal digital 
trust and facilitate tracking the true ROI(return of investment) for artificial intelligence (AI) deployment . 
Special attention  to bioethics  in healthcar e and life sciences is required to increase awareness about the need 
of “informed consent” and “dynamic consent” concepts  for highly sensitive genomic and precision medicine 
data sets.   A cohesive eff ort to uphold digital ethics, while optimizing enterpri se AI deployments is a moral 
and business imperative.  
Bulgaria , Monika Manolova,  Digital National Alliance (Economy)  Noted that perhaps there are some 
intersections between segments which share a bond like agriculture and healthcare(the food we eat, being  
directly reflected in our health) and education and IT(the capacity for various domains to collaborate with 
digital technologies) which may be explored to break down the silos between innovation segments(such as 
working groups).  
Peru,  Andres Leon -Geyer, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUCP (Educatio n and literacy )  
working groups may be further  analyzed but there should also be  a consideration for the difference between 
digital skill gaps and literacy a s literacy is another theme occurring in different countries and disciplines.  
Romania, Ana Prica Cruceanu, Association of Women in Engineering, Science and Technology (AFIST)  
(Digitalization)  outlined that there needs to be recognition for our own biases in the sphere of tech and that 
an elderly  person from a village also needs to be represented in national frameworks , while at the same time 
greater levels of transparency and explainability need to be provided in the field of artificial intelligence to 
prevent furthering the gaps.  
Serbia, Miloš D imitrijević, University of Kragujevac (Digitalization)  - The barriers for improved 
collaboration between the countries are in regulation, different goals and view of policymakers, too big 
bureaucracy, decision -making power at all levels, not enough project s etc. The main drivers for improved 
digital collaboration may be in more projects in this area, harmonization regulation and globally framework 
of this topics, encouraging researchers to deal with this topic and networking researchers from all over the 
world among some  common bases of researchers and not through some decision makers, networking and 
building some platform of producers, consumers, policymakers,  and researchers.  
Ireland,  Shaun Topham, DataVaults and PISTIS(Horizon project) (Digitalization)  A key building block in 
"digitalization  with social values" is data. More equal access to data, particularly to personal data  is vital to 
prevent the evolution of a global data economy  driven by more corporate and less social goals. This in turn 
shapes AI as wide access to data is a prerequisite. Digital SMEs find it harder to access data than they do 
finance. A  pathway for release of personal data for the public good should be develope d. 
India, N. KISHOR NARANG,NARNIX Technolabs (Digitalization)  The artificial -intelligence industry is 
often compared to the oil industry: once mined and refined, data, like oil, can be a highly lucrative commodity. 
Now it seems the metaphor may extend even further. Like its fossil -fuel counterpart, the process of deep 
learning has an outsize environmental impact. Although AI presents transformative opportunities to address 
the earth’s environmental challenges, left unguided, it also has the capab ility to accelerate the environment’s 
degradation. There is a major hype to leverage AI to bring sustainability in different aspects forgetting the 
extensive energy it consumes, in turn increasing GHG emissions and carbon footprint it adds to anything, 
when you apply AI to any product, system or solution. Environmental considerations should be an integral 
part of digital literacy  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 UAE, Dr. Jane Thomason, Founder WMC (Digitalization ) First we need to address universal access to the 
internet. Gen Z and Gen Alp ha will grow up with digital skills which. Older generations may miss out on. All 
education should teach kids from beginning to code therefore, we need to give access to the digital tools and 
how to use them. Digital literacy in the Age of AI means transfo rmation of economic segments as well. AI 
will directly impact the income streams of accountants, doctors, lawyers, journalists, artists, professors, 
teachers and more. These professionals will need to evolve.  
Australia,  Dr. Stephanie Camarena, Founder of S ource Transitions  (Digitalization) Noted that Digital 
literacy in the Age of AI means  - The ability to understand what AI means for oneself and for the 
industry/sector in which you operate. This means the ability to also imagine what AI could do for you an d 
your future. I would also say it is the ability to develop the muscle of critical thinking in an area which has 
deep ethical and social implications. There are opportunities for a greater level of development in all economic 
segments. However, AI applica tions are often developed in tech industries which are effectively disconnected 
from the industries themselves. Often this results in high tech solutions which do not match the type of 
problems that these industries face. In the food industries, AI and dig ital are bringing changes to agriculture 
(crop monitoring and precision agriculture), intelligent packaging to reduce food waste, precision health and 
nutrition, and others.  
 
Summary of Issue3 recommendations  
The combination of digital literacy with digita l fluency is fundamental for every segment of the economy and 
the integration of AI innovation in a meaningful way.  
There needs to be a clear delineation between digital skill gaps and digital literacy, which affect different 
economic segments and economi c spheres, but collaboration will have to be established between the fields to 
break down silos and to support the implementation of transdisciplinary and innovative digital standards. 
Within agriculture an approach which has proved successful is reliance on trusted professionals within 
excellence centers and digital innovation hubs which support the speedier acceptance of digital solutions via 
demonstration. Within healthcare, the solutions require understanding of “informed consent” and “dynamic 
consent”.  Transparency and representation are quite important towards the national frameworks, but there is 
also a need  to open regulatory and strategic frameworks in AI to expert overview.  
 
Detailed Summary of Consultation Recommendation  
 
While the world is connecting through digitalization, societies who lack it remain disconnected, accounting 
for the majority of people on our planet. (e.g. Peru, South Africa). This inequity disempowers people, 
especially educator s(e.g., Zimbabwe, Türkiye,  Bulgaria, Romania) and  creates cultural and social divisions. 
While regional differences are a significant factor in the analysis of digital literacy, the geography is 
sometimes secondary as literacy is an issue even within large metropolitan areas in the  USA. Digital literacy 
should be connected to the UN SDG, becoming a basic human right on the principle of “leave no one behind”. 
Access  to basic services predicated on digital literacy (such as transport, telecommunications,  and healthcare) 
is faced with barriers in the constantly evolving digital context throughout Europe ( e.g., Belgium, Portugal) 
that affects vulnerable groups and the elderly.  
 
Education and literacy  
▪ Additional support and awareness are needed within the farthest removed areas in Africa where people 
are unaware of the opportunities, which digital literacy provides, but such lack of awareness exists also 
in small rural communities within countries like Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, N. Macedonia, which 
requires a “human interface” to the digit al divide.  
▪ Adaptive learning, knowledge, and creativity for all social groups and regional extremes( e.g., Italy, 
some African countries) need to be introduced, due to the speed with which current education systems 
are evolving too slowly in the face of AI( e.g., ChatGTP). Methodologies which encourage augmented 
education,  higher order thinking skills and multimodal learning.  
▪ Rather than assuming every culture desires increasing digitalization  and forcing such solutions  digital 
inclusion a cultural invite a pproach should be implemented. And while certain parts of the world 
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 recognize and implement AI literacy to preserve jobs and upskill ( e.g., Mexico), others view the access 
to the goods and services of the internet as a digital ethics issue.  
▪ Further investment in user -friendly hardware needs to be implemented to prevent a significant barrier 
(for children with disabilities in the UK, disadvantaged schools in New York, the elderly in Portugal 
and Belgium).   
Economy  
 
▪ Within agriculture, manufac turing an approach which has proved successful is reliance on trusted 
professionals within excellence centers and digital innovation hubs which support the speedier 
acceptance of digital solutions via demonstration( e.g., Netherlands).  
▪ Digital literacy sol utions should include explanations of "informed consent" and "dynamic consent." 
(e.g., in healthcare, agriculture and manufacturing). Even for highly educated executives these may be 
concepts that require further training.  
▪ To bridge the economic gaps and d igital divide, various stages of innovation could provide additional 
value to support upskilling small and medium enterprises in global territories ( e.g., Philippines, 
Bermuda, Myanmar)  
 
 
Digitalization  
▪ It is important to clearly define digital skills, digital divide and digital literacy, AI literacy, which affect 
education, economic segments,  and spheres, to measure and resolve digital skill gaps.  
In addition, to provide the means for keeping up with the changing trends and tools in the marketp lace 
and a mechanism for end -users to offer culture specific input.  
▪ Transparency, trust, representation, safety,  and security are quite important inputs for international 
digitalization strategies. When innovating, balance can be achieved through transpare ncy, trust, safety 
and security, representation, as well as regulatory and strategic frameworks in AI/XR through 
transdisciplinary expert oversight.  
▪ Guardrails need to be included within the realm of fast paced AI proliferation and its integration with 
social and education frameworks.  
▪ Additional collaboration will have to be established between a variety of education and economic 
fields to break down silos and to support the implementation of transdisciplinary and innovative digital 
standards.  
▪ This expande d digitalization must include mitigation solutions in alignment with CODES UN. 
Educating the end users about the impact of digitalization and engaging them for local innovative 
solutions. Development of educational programmes to understand the cost of digi talization for the 
environment( e.g., gamification , social, mass media) and provision of “how to use” frameworks for 
digital tools, which support sustainability.  
▪ Alternative solutions for lowering and/or removing barriers for digitization , promoting equity and the 
provision of balance to all actors and within all stakeholders  should be an outcome of UN actions in 
the coming decade. These may include investment, global digital upskilling, drive sustained outcomes, 
have a society of intelligently augmented her oes, infrastructure with equal opportunity given to all.  
 
Co-authors of the recommendations  
 
Consultation organizers and editors  
1. Dr. Monika Manolova, Digital National Alliance, Bulgaria  
2. Dr. Haydee Sheombar , Kankan*Tree, Netherlands  
3. Jaisal Surana, MKAI, UK  
Consultation participants  
1. Marisa Zalabak, Open Channel Culture/IEEE AI Ethics in Education/Planet Positive,  USA  
2. Laura Babío, POLIS Network, Brussels, Belgium  
3. Mónica Rogério, ACDIPE, Portugal  
4. Richard Foster -Fletcher, MKAI, UK  
UN Digital Compact Consultation (09.03.2023 and 28.03.2023)  
 5. Daniel Opanubi, Omde na, Nigeria  
6. Jasen Tanev, Digital National Alliance/CyberClub, Bulgaria  
7. Andres Leon -Geyer, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Peru – PUCP  
8. Oleg Missikoff, Earth 3.0 Foundation, Italy  
9. Jessica Gardner, Worth Marketing Solutions, South Africa  
10. Maria Mac Andrew,  Executive Director My Zalu/AIEthics.World, Ecuador  
11. Victor M. Larios, Universidad de Guadalajara, CUCEA Smart Cities Innovation Center, Mexico  
12. George Beers, Wageningen University, Netherlands  
13. Dr. Ingrid Vasiliu Feltes, Author and Thought  Leader on Healthcare and Life Sciences, USA  
14. Ana Prica Cruceanu, Association of Women in Engineering, Science and Technology (AFIST), 
Romania  
15. Dr. Mulughe ta T. Solomon,PhD, Omdena -Milan C hapter; The Information Lab , Italy (Country of 
Origin - Eritrea)  
16. Edward Darling, LifeMap, UK  
17. Kristina Eskenazi, Chairwoman of the Management Board of  Health & Life Sciences Bulgaria, and 
Member of Manage ment Board of AI  Cluster Bulgaria   
18. Dimitar Dimitrov,  Chairman of Management Board of  Health & Life Sciences Cluster Bulgaria,  and 
Member of Management Board of AI Cluster Bulgaria  
19. Olivia Murungi, PEDAL Consulting, Slovakia  
20. Shaun Topham, DataVaults and PISTIS(Horizon project), Ireland  
21. Assoc. prof. Kosyo Stoy chev, Sofia University Bulgaria  
22. Prof. Mohamed Essaaidi, IEEE Global Cities Alliance, Moroccan School of Engineering Sciences 
(EMSI), Morocco  
23. Gergana Passy, President, Digital National Alliance Bulgaria  
24. Gerry Copitch, MKAI UK  
25. Aleksandra Hadzic, MKAI UK  
26. Dr. Miloš Dimitrijević  , Research Associate at Faculty of Economics, University of Kragujevac, Serbia  
27. Massimo Rocchitta, LAORE  Sardegna  – Regional  Agency for Agriculture  Development , Italy  
28. delphine nyaboke, MKAI/Omdena, Kenya  
29. Lavina Ramkissoon, Advisor Africa n Union (AU), Women in AI Ethics, Global AI Ethics Institute 
(GAIEI), Responsible AI Network (RAIN), Africa  
30. Prof. Markus Krebsz, UNECE GRM / The Human -Ai.Institute  
31. Dr. Meltem Huri Baturay / Prof., Director at the Center for Teaching & Learning, Atılım Univ ersity / 
Founding Leader,  and President of LET -IN R&D, Türkiye  
32. Dr. Manijeh Motaghy, Program Director & Founder of  Perfectly Here, UCLA Mindfulness Instructor 
- United States  
33. Oluwaseun Wey, Senior Project Manager, Nigeria Inter -Bank Settlement System  
34. N. KI SHOR NARANG, Technology Philanthropist, Design Strategist & Architect, Innovation, 
Standardization & Sustainability Evangelist, NARNIX Technolabs, India  
35. Dr. Jane Thomason,  Founder of World Metaverse Council(WMC), Web3.0 Leader, Author, Futurist, 
UAE  
36. Dr. Stephanie Camarena, Founder of Source Transitions,  Researcher RMIT University , Australia  
37. Vibhav Mithal, IPR lawyer, Anand and Anand, India  
 
 
 