Action Plan for a 
Sustainable Planet 
in the Digital Age

This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part and in any form for educational or non-profit services without special permission from  
the copyright holder, provided acknowledgement of the source is made. The citation is: Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability 
(CODES). 2022. Action Plan for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6573509 .
No use of this publication may be made for resale or any other commercial purpose whatsoever without prior permission in writing from 
the Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the 
reproduction, should be addressed to CODES@UN.ORG
Disclaimers
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on 
the part of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries. 
Mention of a commercial company or product in this document does not imply endorsement by the United Nations, collaborating organizations 
or the authors and contributors. The use of information from this document for publicity or advertising is not permitted. Trademark names and 
symbols are used in an editorial fashion with no intention of infringement on trademark or copyright laws.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations. We regret any 
errors or omissions that may have been unwittingly made.
© Maps, photos and illustrations as specified.
Acknowledgements
This Action Plan for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age has been developed through a global consultation and co-design process by the 
Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability (CODES) as a follow-up to the Secretary-General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.  
It represents a synthesis of inputs from the contributors listed in the Annex.
01Digitalization – the use and adoption of digital technologies 
– is driving massive economic, social and environmental 
changes. The future of humanity and the health of planet 
Earth depend to a large extent on how we undergo this 
digital transformation. We have an opportunity to drive this 
transformation in a manner that helps build a healthier, 
safer, cleaner and more equitable future, rather than one 
of exacerbated environmental degradation, inequality and 
social division. However, achieving global sustainability is 
not an inevitable or an obvious outcome of digitalization. 
Indeed, digital technologies, through their energy and 
material requirements and influence on consumer demands, 
have accelerated the exponential rise of the human impact 
on the natural environment that now threatens the resilience 
of our ecological systems, alongside worsening societal 
inequalities and escalating social injustice.1 Digitalization 
has the potential to help transform society and business 
models to a more sustainable and equitable world but only 
if there is a conscious and deliberate effort to steer it in that 
direction. This Action Plan offers a vision on three systemic 
shifts needed to achieve this goal together with a set of 9 
Impact Initiatives to spark immediate collective action and 
multi-stakeholder collaboration.Executive Summary
02

03The Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability (CODES), is an international multi-stakeholder 
alliance created in March 2021 in response to the UN Secretary General’s Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation. CODES’ purpose is to advance digital sustainability, understood as the design, 
development, deployment and regulation of digital technologies to accelerate environmentally and 
socially sustainable development while mitigating risks and unintended consequences.2 CODES is 
specifically striving to reorient and prioritize the application of digital technologies to meet the 2030 
sustainable development agenda and to achieve the multiple global environmental agreements 
that have been adopted by UN Member States. Digitalization will be crucial in achieving the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. An assessment in 2020 found 70 per cent of 
169 targets base-lining the world’s sustainability goals can be positively influenced using digital 
technology applications.3,4 This requires facilitating collective action that can lead to systemic 
transformation and to removal of barriers and perverse incentives that undermine the adoption or 
scaling of digital technologies for sustainability. 
To date, CODES is the only entity of its scale and credibility to undertake and progress this mandate, 
and is uniquely positioned to facilitate this work. CODES offers an inclusive trans-national platform 
backed by the impartiality of the UN, where key global stakeholders across governments, private 
sector, academia, and civil society convene and align to forge the collective action needed to make 
digitalization itself sustainable and to harness digital innovations for sustainability. 
The founding co-champions of CODES include the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the International Science Council, the German 
Environment Agency, the Kenya Ministry of Environment and Forestry, Future Earth, and Sustainability 
in the Digital Age. The co-champions act as the Secretariat for CODES in close coordination and 
cooperation with the Office of the Secretary General’s Envoy on Technology.Coalition for Digital 
Environmental Sustainability 
(CODES)
04CODES Action Plan
The CODES Action Plan for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age marks the 50th anniversary of 
the Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment and the establishment of the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) set-up to promote global environmental sustainability. The goal 
of the Action Plan is to offer a vision and set of priorities to advance digital sustainability through a 
series of multi-stakeholder Impact Initiatives that require collective action and collaboration. 
As a result of a consultative process over the past 12 months, this Action Plan describes 3 systemic 
shifts and 6 strategic priorities within each shift that are needed to harness digital transformation 
as a positive and exponential force for progressing environmentally and socially sustainable 
development (see Figure A). This is followed by a set of 9 global Impact Initiatives as actionable 
items with measurable targets that have the potential to trigger systems-level or sector-level 
transformations through multi-stakeholder collaboration at the regional and global scales (see Table).
This Action Plan is meant to inform the emerging set of priorities for the Global Digital Compact 
proposed by the UN Secretary-General’s latest report “Our Common Agenda”, which calls for a new 
landscape of digital governance and collaboration. It will also contribute to the long term legacy 
initiatives of the Stockholm +50 conference. The contents of this Action Plan have also been 
designed to inform on-going deliberations in the UN Environment Assembly, the UN Human Rights 
Council, the International Telecommunications Union and by the UN Development Programme 
linked to digital transformation and the recognized human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable 
environment.5 
This Action Plan is being published with two supplements. The first supplement “ Accelerating 
Sustainability Through Digital Transformation - Use Cases and Innovations ” includes a number of 
use cases and innovations on digital sustainability on policies, partnerships and applications. The 
second supplement “ Mapping Global and Regional Stakeholders Working on Digital Sustainability ” 
includes an ongoing mapping of key international and regional stakeholders against the three shifts 
and 6 priorities within each shift. These supplements are living documents that will be continuously 
updated on www.sparkblue.org/CODES . 

05Figure A:  Three Shifts and 18 Strategic Priorities to Achieve a Sustainable Planet 
in the Digital Age. These shifts and priorities were identified by CODES stakeholders 
through a 12 month consultation and co-creation process. To catalyze these shifts, 
CODES stakeholders recommended nine global Impact Initiatives requiring collective 
action and multi-stakeholder collaboration.Sustainable DigitalizationAlign Vision Values Objectives
Digitalization for SustainabilityMitigate Negative Im
pacts
Accelerate InnovationEnable AlignmentConnectingTransformations
Digital Competencies
Science & Systems 
Thinking
Digital Multilateralism
Pioneering 
Coalitions
Norms & 
StandardsEnergy &Emissions
Material Base
Consumption
Misinformation
Digital Divide
Rights Violations
Planetary 
Digital Twin
Sustainable 
Circular Economy
Sustainable ConsumptionKnowledge CommonsGovernance BreakthroughsGreen, Digital, 
Just TransitionThree Systemic Shifts 
and Priorities
06CODES Impact Initiatives
SHIFT 11. World Commission on 
Sustainability in the 
Digital AgeUndertake new research and/or leverage existing bodies 
of research to provide science-driven recommendations 
on accelerating sustainability in the digital age.
2. Clearing House for 
Digital Sustainability 
StandardsPlatform to co-define key standards for digital 
sustainability and offer a clearing house, taking into 
account the recommendations put forward by the World 
Commission and other bodies.
3. Education for 
Digital Sustainable 
DevelopmentDecentralized approach to develop literacy and 
education programmes on digital sustainability that are 
needs based, localized and contextualized.SHIFT 24. Harmonization of 
Digital Companies’ 
GHG InventoriesNew international platform(s) to facilitate 
harmonization, interoperability and adoption of 
GHG inventories and reporting standards for digital 
companies, products and services.
5. Sustainable 
Procurement 
and Green Digital 
Infrastructure PledgeInternational framework to enable standardization and 
harmonization of sustainable procurement principles 
and green digital infrastructure across governments 
and corporations.
6. Digital Product 
Passport for CircularityInitiate the design and development of standards and 
pilot testing for digital product passports that track a 
product’s climate, environmental, and social impacts 
throughout the value chain.SHIFT 37. Digital Sustainability 
Innovation Hubs and 
AcceleratorsGlobal network of connected and collaborative 
Innovation Hubs to accelerate digital sustainability 
innovations and offer real-world laboratories and 
scaling opportunities for digital sustainability solutions.
8. Data and Assessments 
as Digital Public Goods 
for SustainabilityOpen global standards and governance frameworks for 
environment and climate data, as digital public goods, 
to drive sustainability assessments, global stock taking 
and decision-making.
9. Decentralized 
Financing of 
Sustainable SolutionsDecentralized financing and matchmaking for 
sustainability solutions, including crowdfunding, 
payment for ecosystem services, sustainability filters, 
algorithms, etc.
07CODES Engagement Pathways 
The founding co-champions of CODES collectively initiate and engage in multi-stakeholder 
consultations to pool academic, policy and industry-oriented knowledge from across the public 
and private entities, civil society and indigenous groups on advancing digital sustainability. CODES 
aims to conduct collective intelligence and co-creation processes with stakeholders as the basis for 
collective action, with an emphasis on diversity, inclusion and gender balance.   
To date, the CODES co-champions have mapped over 240 stakeholders working on digital 
sustainability at the global and regions levels and have engaged over 1,000 people from 100 
countries working on the digital transformation and sustainability nexus. 
CODES stakeholders are invited to join and collaborate with CODES through 3, intersecting 
engagement pathways. 
• Catalyser: Stakeholders seeking to engage directly with one or more of the Impact Initiatives that 
are proposed in the Action Plan or future iterations.
• Action Network: Stakeholders contributing to and leveraging the 3 shifts proposed in the Action 
Plan to support the progression of digital sustainability. 
• Advocates: Stakeholders seeking to contribute their expertise to the CODES community and 
become an advocate for the CODES vision and values.
Catalyzers of 
Impact Initiatives
Implement the Impact 
Initiatives of the Action 
Plan
 →Reporting
 →Advisory BoardAction Network
Register as a CODES 
Stakeholder to support 
digital sustainability
 →Contribute to and 
apply 3 Shifts
Advocate
Join the CODES 
Community of Practice
 →Expert contributions 
and advocacyCODES 
Community on 
SparkBlue
Three engagement 
pathways supported by 
www.sparkblue.org/
CODES1 2
3
08
09Table of Contents
Executive Summary           01
Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability (CODES)    03
C O D E S  A c t i o n  P l a n          0 4
Three Systemic Shifts and Priorities       05
C O D E S  I m p a c t  I n i t i a t i v e s         0 6
C O D E S  E n g a g e m e n t  P a t h w a y s         0 7
1. Overview: A Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age     10
What’s at Stake          1 0
The Challenge and the Opportunity        1 1
The Action Plan - Seizing the Opportunity       1 3
2. Three Shifts for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age     16
Shift 1: Enable Alignment  - Aligning vision, values, and objectives   17 
of the digital age with sustainable development
Shift 2: Mitigate Negative Impacts  - Ensure sustainable digitalization  20  
to mitigate negative environmental and social impacts
Shift 3: Accelerate Innovation  - Directing innovation efforts toward   24 
digital sustainability
3. Impact Initiatives for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age   28
 K e y  M e s s a g e s           2 8
I m p a c t  I n i t i a t i v e s          2 9
Pathways to engage in the CODES Action Plan     37
4. Annexures           38
 Annex I: Stakeholder Mapping        39
 Annex II: Summary of Digital Transformation needs     49
 References           56
 Contributors           6 0
Supplemental materials to this Action Plan include:
• Supplement 1:  Accelerating Sustainability Through Digital Transformation -  
Use Cases and Innovations. 
• Supplement 2: Mapping Global and Regional Stakeholders Working on  
Digital Sustainability
10Overview: A Sustainable Planet in 
the Digital Age
What’s at Stake
In 2015 the international community set itself 17 ambitious Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , 
which are to serve as a common vision and action agenda for all countries until the year 2030.6 They 
are intended to promote human dignity, the protection of the planet, peace and prosperity for all, and 
to promote global partnerships. However, the SDGs 2020 Progress Report shows that the world is 
not on track to achieve these goals by 2030.7 The current trajectory of the triple planetary crises of 
climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution, threatens to take us beyond the limits of the earth’s 
capacity to sustain human society at near to present levels of social or individual wellbeing.8 The 
resulting environmental crises are already being felt across the world. We now have less than ten 
years to achieve the SDGs, and the reality is that we will not achieve these goals by 2030 without 
major systems transformation. While we grapple with this understanding, digital technologies and 
capabilities are rapidly accelerating, with the potential to either hinder our ability to achieve the SDGs 
or facilitate the speed and scale of change needed. 
There is a foundational sustainability question about whether humankind is capable of directing 
digital change for a civilizational shift towards a renewed humanism . Are we able to realize and 
safeguard the idea of human rights, liberal freedoms, science, rule of law, and democracy against 
totalitarian temptation, surveillance capitalism and human enhancement? This is an ethical 
endeavour that needs broad discourse and public response. What are the implications for emerging 
digital governance patterns that could challenge our current system of sovereign nation states? Will 
privacy, trust, deliberation and democratic procedures be undermined or are we heading towards 
civic empowerment and a transnational ‘Earth system consciousness’? These are big questions, but 
they are imprinted in every step we take forward in further developing our digital infrastructure: how 
we generate and operate data, how we nudge for sustainable lifestyles, how we build transparent 
supply chains with safeguards, how we share knowledge, how we provide access to basic services 
and breakthrough technologies, how we strengthen democracy or how we as human beings define 
our relationship to nature. The global community needs to invest in inclusive fora and frameworks to 
deliberate, assess, govern and take collective action on these issues. Scientifically driven and socially 
embedded anticipatory assessment processes and foresight should support this endeavour. 
The implications of the digital divide sit at the heart of these fundamental questions . There exist 
deep inequalities in the accessibility and availability of digital rights and services and a wide gap 
between the digitally connected and unconnected. According to data from the ITU, approximately 4.9 
billion people – or 63 per cent of the world’s population – used the Internet in 2021.9 This represents 
an increase of 17 per cent  since 2019, with 782 million people estimated to have come online during 
that period. Of the 2.9 billion people off-line, 96 per cent live in developing countries. Indeed, the WEF 
Global Risks report for 2021 listed “digital power concentration” and “digital inequality” as number 
6 and 7 on the critical short-term threat list – both representing a clear and present danger to social 
and political stability (see CODES Action Plan Supplement 1, Box 1).10 If digital capacities are to be 
leveraged for global environmental and social sustainability, the digital divide needs to be closed in a 
sustainable and equitable manner.  
11The Challenge and the Opportunity 
The UN Secretary Generals’ Roadmap for Digital Cooperation  makes a number of key observations 
about the challenges and opportunities between digital technology and the evolution of society as 
captured by the following sentiment:
“Digital technology is shaping history. But there is also the 
sense that it is running away with us. Where will it take us? Will our 
dignity and rights be enhanced or diminished? Will our societies 
become more equal or less equal? Will we become more, or less, 
secure and safe? The answers to these questions depend on our 
ability to work together across disciplines and actors, across 
nations and political divides. We have a collective responsibility to 
give direction to these technologies so that we maximize benefits 
and curtail unintended consequences and malicious use.”
António Gu terres , UN Secretary General  
Photo: Eskinder Debebe / UN Photo
We are witnessing fundamental shifts in how different economic sectors define, create, and 
distribute value . Digital capabilities are disrupting most economic sectors including water, 
agriculture, energy, transport, cities and buildings (see Supplement 1, Boxes 2-8). New trans-sectoral 
and trans-national business models and marketplaces are emerging with often unforeseen or opaque 
social and environmental consequences.11 New dimensions of cost optimizations, operational 
efficiencies, and extremely fast and cheap expansions of products and services, incentivized by rapid 
growth and profit are accelerating unsustainable lifestyles and values. At least 1.5 billion people 
consume products and services through e-commerce platforms,12 and 60 per cent of the global 
population is anticipated to engage with social media by mid-2022 - roughly 4.6 billion.13 In 2021, 
global media advertising spending grew by almost 22% to reach a high of $710 billion, with digital 
formats now representing 62% of total advertising sales.14 The transition to a digital economy under 
the current “business as usual” paradigm will increasingly enable and accelerate operating models, 
values and consumption behaviours that are not in line with the SDGs. 
The digital sector itself is energy and materials-intensive.  According to some estimates, the share 
of the global carbon footprint of digital gadgets, the internet and the systems supporting them is 2.3 
per cent, roughly the same as global air travel.15,16 As the world prepares for increasingly decentralized 
internet models like Web 3.0, reliance on energy-intensive technologies like blockchain and AI 
computing could also increase. In terms of material demands, globally, the world produces as much 
as 50 million tons of electronic e-waste a year, while only 17.4 per cent of this e-waste is recycled.17 
In order to meet the high demand for hardware, extraction of rare earth elements and other precious 
metals like cobalt and lithium is increasing steadily with important geopolitical implications.
Addressing these challenges is more possible than ever before . We can collectively choose to build 
a future in which digital technologies accelerate and scale environmental and social sustainability, 
underpin sustainable economies, and empower citizens and local communities. However, 
accelerating sustainability with digital technologies will not happen without deliberate decisions. 
Indeed, if governed effectively and reflexively, the emerging digital products, services, platforms 
and business models can help address and unlock many of the systemic level barriers and perverse 
incentives that have inhibited sustainable markets, behaviours and lifestyles from scaling.
12The Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability (CODES) is a multi-stakeholder alliance 
formed as a follow-up to the UN Secretary General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation . Its 
mission is to facilitate the needed cooperation to leverage digital transformation as a positive and 
exponential force for progressing environmentally and socially sustainable development, while 
mitigating risks and unintended consequences. The CODES Action Plan, generated through a 
global multi-stakeholder co-creation process with the CODES community over the past 12 months, 
calls for 3 systemic shifts and 6 strategic priorities across each shift that are needed to accelerate 
environmentally and socially sustainable development through digital transformation pathways. This 
is followed by a set of 9 global Impact Initiatives as actionable items and measurable targets that 
can be undertaken to consolidate and coordinate existing efforts to catalyse the 3 shifts during the 
2022-2025 time-frame. These Initiatives have the potential to trigger systems-level or sector-level 
transformations through multi-stakeholder collaboration at the regional and global scales. They will 
require a massive, coordinated effort across actor groups, digital value chains, services, platforms 
and within business models. Thus redefining the ecological, social and economic objectives that are 
necessary for a sustainable planet in the digital age.
Definitions of Key Terms
Digital economy:  The global network of economic and social activities that are enabled by 
digital technologies, such as the internet, mobile technology and internet of things (IoT).18,19  
Digital sector:  Combination of manufacturing and service industries whose primary purpose 
is to both create and sell digital technology products, services or solutions.20,21   
Digitalization: Use of digital technologies to turn products and services into a digital format 
to drive efficiency and innovation.22,23 
Digital transformation: Systems-level economic, societal and environmental transformations 
triggered as a result of digitalization.24 
Digital sustainability: The design, development, deployment and regulation of digital 
technologies to secure sustainable economic, environmental and social development.25,26,27,28  
In the CODES Action Plan, this refers to an overarching aim, embodying all 3 shifts of the 
Action Plan. 
Sustainable digitalization:   Digital infrastructures, software and applications that are socially 
responsible, ethical and environmentally sustainable throughout their lifecycle.29,30 In the 
CODES Action Plan, this refers to shift 2 and the 6 related strategic priorities.
Digitalization for sustainability:  Digital innovation that seeks to proactively enable, 
accelerate and scale environmentally and socially sustainable development.31,32 In the 
CODES Action Plan, this refers to shift 3 and the 6 related strategic priorities.
Corporate digital responsibility: A set of practices and behaviours that help an organization 
use data and digital technologies in ways that are perceived as socially, economically, and 
environmentally responsible.33
13The Action Plan: Seizing the Opportunity
There appears to be emerging political will to address digital ethics, norms and governance  as 
expressed in initiatives including, among others, the UN Secretary General’s Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation,34 Our Common Agenda,35 and the planned Global Digital Compact. There is now an 
opportunity for increased agility in the governance and execution of these initiatives that reflects the 
pace of change of digital advancements and a deeper sense of urgency to consolidate intersecting 
priorities and solicit collective multilateral stakeholder agreements. This must be accompanied 
by a set of priorities for advancing environmentally and socially sustainable development within a 
renewed social contract for the digital age. 
The vision for this Action Plan is therefore to establish actionable impact initiatives that will 
enable environmental and social sustainability to be firmly encoded in the global digitalization 
efforts.  The CODES community has collectively identified 3 major shifts that must be addressed for 
this vision to be realized. Strategic priorities to catalyse these three shifts are described in detail in 
Section 2 of this Action Plan. Important overarching messages and actionable Impact Initiatives to 
advance the strategic priorities are summarized in Section 3. The aim is to encourage the expansion 
of existing efforts, intersecting and coordinating parallel initiatives and catalysing new efforts. This 
also includes integration of the shifts and strategic priorities in relevant international processes 
such as the UN Environment Assembly, Stockholm +50 and the planned Global Digital Compact 
(Figure 1). The target audience includes national and local governments, policy makers, international 
organizations, private sector companies, civil society, academia, and the science community. 
The first shift that is needed is to align the visions, values and objectives of digital capabilities 
with those of environmentally and socially sustainable development . Greater commitments to 
sustainability require shifts in values and norms that drive a transition beyond profit towards positive 
social and environmental outcomes. The mindset of maximizing shareholder value must evolve to a 
new set of values focusing on transparency, accountability and inclusive stakeholder engagement. 
A shared set of sustainability values and standards must be encoded into the design, development 
and deployment of digital products, services, platforms and business models. Enabling such a shift 
requires connecting communities, building digital competencies, embedding both science and the 
arts, advancing multilateral action, building pioneering coalitions, and adopting norms and standards.
The second shift is to ensure inherently sustainable digitalization . We must confront the paradox 
that increased reliance on digital technologies comes at an environmental cost. Indeed, digitalization 
is encouraging unsustainable consumption, causing environmental impacts across supply chains, 
increasing demands on energy and resources, entrenching and exacerbating social divides, 
amplifying misinformation, dislocating labour markets, exacerbating inequality within and between 
societies, and consolidating the power of the few over the many (see Supplement 1, Box 1)36 This shift 
requires a focus on six problem areas entrenched in digitalization: energy and emissions, materials, 
consumption behaviours, misinformation, digital divides and rights violations. 
The third shift is to direct and incentivize innovations towards digitalization for sustainability . 
Digital technology and innovation, if driven inclusively and with intention, can empower government, 
businesses, communities and individuals to make decisions and take action that can enable 
planetary sustainability and equitable human development. Digital transformations across sectors 
and scales must be actively guided through conscious choices and values. Shift 3 requires six 
suggested areas of innovation that must be intentionally incentivized to support digitalization 
for sustainability. These include building a digital twin of the planet, enabling a circular economy, 
supporting sustainable consumption, enabling a knowledge commons, creating networked and agile 
14governance and prioritizing digital technologies that catalyse the transition to a green, just economy 
for the whole of society. 
The contents of this Action Plan are based on a series of open dialogues and collective intelligence 
processes undertaken with over 1000 stakeholders . This co-creation process involved structured 
round-tables, a global conference, online consultations and collective intelligence exercises, and 
international events, including at the UN General Assembly and the UN Environment Assembly (see 
Figure 2). The process captured a diverse range of views, experiences and priorities from stakeholders 
in over 100 countries and from across multiple major stakeholder groups. These inputs have been 
synthesized by the co-champions of CODES in close collaboration with the Office of the UN Secretary 
General’s Envoy on Technology within the framework of the Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.
As the digital age unfolds , it must become the responsibility of governments at all levels to ensure 
the availability of digital infrastructure and to catalyse and incentivize the use of digital products 
and services to create social, economic and ecological benefits. Furthermore, governments must 
strengthen the standards and open source communities that provide the technologies which enable 
those products, services and the digital transformation at large. This must go hand in hand with 
paying due attention to trust building, transparency and the protection of human and civil rights 
as part of the digital governance framework. Cooperation is needed to ensure uniformity of intent 
behind key legislation, regulations and policies given the global reach of digital products, services 
and platforms and the existence of international businesses operating in multiple geographies. It is 
also equally clear that action cannot be undertaken by governments acting alone. Success depends 
on deep collaboration within and between international organizations, the global science community, 
arts and open technology communities, all levels of government, civil society, the private sector and 
digital-native companies. 
Figure 1: International processes that anchor the CODES Action Plan for a Sustainable Planet in the 
Digital Age. Three main international processes served as the catalyzing force for the CODES Action 
Plan including the SDGs, the Roadmap for Digital Cooperation and the Secretary General’s Common 
Agenda. The CODES Action Plan has been designed to influence three major processes going 
forward including Stockholm +50, the Summit of the Future and Global Digital Compact and the 6th 
UN Environment Assembly.
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals (SDGs)Roadmap for 
Digital 
CooperationThe Secretary 
General 
Common 
AgendaUNEA-5.2
Stockholm+50UNEA-6 Summit of the 
Future
2015 2021 2022 2022 2024 2023

15
Debate  of the UN General 
Assembly  on Digital 
Cooperation and ConnectivityFirst CODES Roundtable 
to generate feedback for 
the Action Plan
CODES 
ConferenceSecond CODES 
Roundtable to 
generate feedback for 
the Action PlanOnline consultation  
and feedback process
Side event at the UN 
Environment AssemblyCODES 
Action Plan 
LaunchOnline consultation  
and feedback process
Online consultation  
and feedback processes, 
including Stockholm +50 
National and Regional 
Dialogues31 MAR
2021CODES 
Launch
2022
to
2025Implementation 
of the Impact 
Initiatives31 MAR
20217 MAY
20217–21
MAY
2021
30 JUN
–1 JUL
20211–13 
FEB
20227 FEB
2022
2 MAR
20222 MAR
–20 MAY
20222 JUN
2022
Figure 2: Co-creation process behind the Action Plan for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age.  
All CODES products are based on an inclusive multi-stakeholder co-design process involving multiple 
touchpoints and opportunities for peer contributions. The Action Plan has been based on a wide 
stakeholder engagement and co-design process that invited over 1,000 people to contribute to the 
shifts, priorities and impact initiatives over a 12 month period. A range of digital collaboration and 
collective intelligence tools were used to support this process including Sparkblue, Google Docs, 
Mentimeter and Thought Exchange. The Action Plan also benefited from a series of national and 
regional consultations that were undertaken as part of the Stockholm +50 preparatory process. The 
digital needs that were identified in these processes are summarized in Annex II. 
16Three Shifts for a Sustainable 
Planet in the Digital Age
Sustainable DigitalizationAlign Vision Values Objectives
Digitalization for SustainabilityMitigate Negative Im
pacts
Accelerate InnovationEnable AlignmentConnectingTransformations
Digital Competencies
Science & Systems 
Thinking
Digital Multilateralism
Pioneering 
Coalitions
Norms & 
StandardsEnergy &Emissions
Material Base
Consumption
Misinformation
Digital Divide
Rights Violations
Planetary 
Digital Twin
Sustainable 
Circular Economy
Sustainable ConsumptionKnowledge CommonsGovernance BreakthroughsGreen, Digital, 
Just TransitionThe following sections identify and describe the 3 systemic shifts and 6 strategic priorities within 
each shift needed to enable digitalization as a force for good towards accelerating environmentally, 
socially and economically sustainable development. 
Figure 3: Three Shifts and six strategic priorities within each shift to achieve a sustainable planet in 
the digital age. 
17Shift 1: Enable Alignment 
Aligning vision, values, and objectives of the digital 
age with sustainable development
The first shift strives to progress the convergence of digitalization and sustainability as the 
foundation for accelerating environmentally, socially and economically sustainable development. It 
proposes a reorientation of the purpose of digitalization, development of common visions, values and 
renewed objectives for sustainable development in the Digital Age. 
To drive this first shift, strong coalitions across public and private entities, including members from 
academia and civil society must proactively shape the digital age towards sustainable futures. 
CODES stakeholders identified 6 strategic priorities  that act as fundamental enablers to achieving 
the systems-level change needed for this shift (see Annex 1, Table 1 for initial mapping of global 
stakeholders addressing this shift):
ENABLER 1  
Connect Communities and Transformations: Connect digital and sustainability 
communities to catalyse the twin transformation. 
Indigenous and modern understandings of environmental and social sustainability values must be 
systematically considered by actors at the forefront of existing and emerging digital technologies, 
innovations and governance frameworks (see Supplement 1, Box 9). Similarly, sustainability 
commitments and multilateral environmental agreements must consistently consider how they 
can be enabled through digital transformation. Strategic dialogue and mutual learning between 
the digital and sustainability communities is needed to enable greater cohesiveness of visions and 
mindsets and can be used as an opportunity to solve systemic barriers to environmental and social 
SIX ENABLERS
Connecting 
Transformations
Digital 
Competencies
Science & Systems 
ThinkingMultilateral 
Action
Pioneering 
Coalitions
Norms & 
StandardsShift 1
Enable 
Alignment
Align vision, 
values, objectives
Figure 4: Shift 1: Enable Alignment - Aligning vision, values, and objectives of the digital age with 
sustainable development.6 ENABLERS
18sustainability. This integrated approach should be consequently implemented in, and incentivized 
by, national and international policy agendas and organizations, research and education programs, 
technology development and civil society action alike. Silo-thinking and business as usual must end 
in order to systematically address digitalization and sustainability as closely interlinked cross-cutting 
twin transitions. 
ENABLER 2    
Develop Digital Competencies: Build interdisciplinary skill sets. 
Many of the key actors with the ability to influence the trajectory of digitalization and sustainability 
lack a number of essential digital competencies and skills needed to catalyse this shift. On the one 
hand, public sector and policy makers need to understand both the environmental opportunities and 
risks from digital transformation. They must build up their own digital capacities to understand what 
they want to regulate, enable and incentivize. On the other hand, entrepreneurs, computer scientists 
as well as hardware and software engineers also need to understand how their products and services 
generate different sustainability incentives and impacts in the real world in order to take these into 
account in the design process. They must enhance their understanding of today’s sustainability 
challenges, especially on decarbonization, dematerialization, detoxification and economic circularity. 
This must be centered on a renewed humanism mindset that recognizes empathy, ethics and 
traditional indigenous knowledge. Academic curricula, vocational training, professional associations 
all need upskilling to reflect digital sustainability needs and outcomes. Moreover, to overcome the 
digital divide, digital and sustainability literacy has to be an integrated effort.
ENABLER 3  
Harness Science and Systems Thinking: Mobilize science to understand how the 
sustainability of complex systems can be enhanced through digital transformation. 
Understanding the inherent complexity and trade-offs of achieving planetary sustainability is one 
of the biggest challenges facing modern science. This entails the earth system as such, including 
its variety of complex and interlinked dynamics, as well as our economic and social systems and 
sectors. The question of how different feedback loops operate to either reinforce or shift system 
behaviours is also key. A “systems thinking’’ holistic approach will be needed that focuses on the 
way that a system’s constituent parts interrelate and how systems work over time and within the 
context of larger systems. A science-based understanding of how digital technologies are changing 
key economic, social and environmental systems and how they can be aligned towards sustainability 
outcomes is needed as part of the new social contract for the digital age (see Supplement 1, Box 10).
ENABLER 4  
Advance Digital Multilateralism: Develop new multilateralism for digital sustainability 
and a culture of multi-stakeholder collaboration and collective action. 
The digital ecosystems of data, analytics and applications are not confined to national boundaries, 
nor yet governed by the international community in an effective and inclusive manner. Instead, 
a handful of companies now have the ability to influence human attitudes and behaviours at a 
planetary scale with more money, power and reach than most national governments. For strong 
digital innovation ecosystems, we need to promote a culture of open collaboration and co-creation 
between governments, the private sector and civil society. This new kind of digital translateralism 
and multilateralism, with collaborative policymaking should define, implement and apply international 
standards and safeguards for a global, inclusive, and sustainable digital ecosystem. Additionally, 
opportunities to incorporate Indigenous and traditional knowledge and expertise should be leveraged 
when designing solutions for global sustainability. Finally, while respecting all nations’ sovereignty 
19over their data, we must promote good data governance and stewardship that ensures the timely 
availability of relevant data in a user-friendly, accessible, portable, machine-readable and actionable 
format. 
ENABLER 5  
Build Pioneering Coalitions: Foster intersectional innovation ecosystems and 
solutions that support agile implementation and collaborative governance. 
While new forms of digital multilateralism are needed, this alone is not enough to effectively govern 
and steer the pace and direction of digital technologies. Inclusive and mission oriented coalitions 
between governments, academia, private sector actors and civil society organizations will be 
needed to catalyse transformational investments in digital innovation ecosystems, infrastructure 
and emerging standards that are premised on planetary sustainability. Committed coalitions with a 
shared sense of common purpose and practice can serve as testing grounds for better standards 
and governance solutions. Agile approaches to define and test reflexive and iterative governance 
frameworks for digital technologies must be explored. This should be based on adaptive, forward 
looking and innovation-friendly regulation together with tiered and principle-based approaches to 
collective governance.37
ENABLER 6  
Adopt Norms and Standards: Adopt joint principles, normative frameworks and 
global standards for digital sustainability. 
While the pace of digital innovation is dynamic, and although several international standards are 
emerging,38 there are only a few nascent normative and ethical frameworks in place to guide its 
direction at the global level. Many of these frameworks lack clear principles and norms linked to 
environmental and social sustainability or climate action. In this context, it is critical to develop a 
global set of standards and guidelines for the sustainable production, use and adoption of digital 
technologies  based on specific, measurable, achievable and time-bound indicators. Additionally, 
it is critical to set a global standard methodology for assessing and measuring the net impact of 
digital technologies39 on sustainability and climate change. It is noted that standardization in this 
domain has been ongoing for a decade or more, so any effort in this direction should start from 
existing standardization process as well as the emerging field of Corporate Digital Responsibility (see 
Supplement 1, Boxes 11 and 12). Efforts in this direction will also need to cover the governance of data 
that is being used to fuel digital transformation and has become one of the new factors of production, 
alongside land, labour and capital.
206 PROBLEMS
Figure 5: Shift 2: Mitigate Negative Impacts - Ensure sustainable digitalization to mitigate negative 
environmental and social impactsShift 2: Mitigate Negative Impacts
Ensure sustainable digitalization to mitigate negative 
environmental and social impacts
The second shift calls for a commitment to sustainable digitalization to mitigate the negative 
environmental and social impacts from digital technologies and their supply chains. These include 
significant ecological impacts linked to energy and material consumption coupled with social 
impacts tied to unsustainable consumption patterns, misinformation, unequal access to digital 
technologies, discrimination in the provisioning of digital skills and capabilities, or targeted human 
rights violations. 
CODES stakeholders identified 6 strategic priorities that must be addressed to mitigate these 
negative impacts and to ensure Sustainable Digitalization understood as the digitalization that 
is responsible, ethical and sustainable (see Annex 1, Table 2 for an initial mapping of global 
stakeholders addressing this shift):
PROBLEM 1    
Reduce Energy and Emissions: Reduce energy consumption and related  
CO2 emissions.  
According to the ITU, ICT’s share of global electricity consumption was projected to reach 3.2 per 
cent in 2020.40 Depending on scope and method of calculation, some estimates suggest that the ICT 
sector could be up to 7 per cent of the total global electricity use in 2020.41 Peer-reviewed studies 
estimate ICT’s current share of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions ranging from 1.8%–3.9% 
depending on the calculation method.42 The explosion of digital cryptocurrencies is also accelerating 
energy consumption and associated carbon footprint. The carbon footprint of the Bitcoin network, 
21annualized from 2017-2022, was a staggering 114 megatons comparable to the carbon footprint 
of Czech Republic.43 Some strategies to address this have focused on investments in sustainable 
decentralized renewable energy infrastructure and green data centers (see Supplement 1, Box 13).  
More broadly, common standards are needed to ensure the energy consumption and carbon 
emissions of digital platforms be transparently aggregated and calculated to support the calculation 
of Scope 1, 2 and 3 emissions for carbon accounting. Enabling policies and incentivization 
mechanisms such as sustainable public procurement can thus ensure compliance with such global 
standards. 
PROBLEM 2  
Minimize Material Base: Address material use and waste linked to digitalization.
The fast-evolving digital economy demands an increasing number of elements for ICT devices such 
as computers, data centers, mobile phones, batteries, and networks. To meet the growing demand 
for green technologies associated with the energy transitions, the extraction of minerals, such as 
graphite, lithium and cobalt, could increase by 500 per cent by 205044 having a substantial impact 
on land, water, air and biodiversity. There are at least twenty-four elements that are considered 
important for the digital future, including a range of rare earth elements.45 Each of these generate 
different environmental, social and political impacts during their extraction, transformation and 
disposal, often depending on the level of national and local governance capacity to monitor 
and mitigate those impacts. In 2019 a record 53.6 million metric tons of e-waste was produced 
globally.46 The equivalent weight of 125,000 Boeing 747 jumbo jets – more than all of the commercial 
aircrafts ever created.47 This makes e-waste the fastest-growing domestic waste stream with only 
17.4 per cent of e-waste documented as formally collected and recycled, and only 78 countries 
having legislations to manage e-waste.48 Digitalization, thus, must go hand in hand with a circular 
economy so that metals and minerals used for digital products can be tracked, traced, recovered and 
recirculated. ICT producers must be held accountable through the extended producer responsibility 
approach for the environmental impact associated with their products and services and legislation 
should enforce stricter sustainability requirements. Minimum standards for the procurement of green 
digital infrastructure, digital services and ICT products would also support a circular economy.
PROBLEM 3  
Address Consumption Drivers:  Restrain persuasive technologies and practices that 
accelerate consumption. 
Current marketplace and social media business models often permit a one-way flow of user data 
and preferences to digital platform companies in an opaque manner. This information is then mined, 
transformed into targeted advertisements, and used to accelerate the consumption of products and 
services through persuasive digital technologies such as: (1) product customization; (2) influencer 
endorsements; (3) personalized advertising; (4) digital nudging; (5) and 24/7 opportunities for 
purchasing (see Supplement 1, Box 14). Additionally, digital technologies are optimizing supply 
chains and enabling efficiency gains by reducing the time, transaction costs or human capital 
needed for various tasks. This is lowering the costs of production and distribution of goods and as 
a consequence,  creating “rebound effects”,49,50 by placing a downward pressure on the prices of 
goods and services, thereby enabling increased production and consumption. All of these catalysing 
factors, from persuasive technologies, efficiency gains, and associated rebound effects, need to be 
considered in any policy actions and economic accounting frameworks that promote sustainability 
through digital transformation. Measures at the systems-level, such as carbon prices and trading 
schemes, can represent the necessary tools to contain these factors and address indirect rebound 
effects. This must also include specific ethical frameworks combined with algorithmic transparency 
to govern digital nudging. 
22PROBLEM 4  
Mitigate Misinformation: Prevent the amplification of misinformation and 
disinformation about sustainability and related themes. 
4.6 billion people are now connected and exchanging ideas through social media and chat apps.51 
This offers both powerful opportunities for accelerating social change as well as risks from the 
spread of misinformation of a magnitude different from anything we have experienced in human 
history. An MIT study found that false news stories are 70 per cent more likely to be retweeted than 
true news stories are. It also takes true stories about six times as long to reach 1,500 people as it 
does for false stories to reach the same number of people.52 The spread of misinformation about 
planetary sustainability topics such as climate change, biodiversity loss or pollution can undermine 
collective action and trust in institutions as well as magnify polarization and mistrust between 
divided groups.53 Trusted sources of information must be more systematically identified and made 
accessible, and articles containing misinformation flagged or taken down (see Supplement 1, Box 15).
PROBLEM 5  
Close the Digital Divide: Close the digital divide in an environmentally and socially 
sustainable manner. 
The digital divide is the product of systemic inequities and power imbalances that must be 
addressed, amongst other measures, through agile governance frameworks and public investment 
in digital infrastructure together with digital literacy building. It goes beyond inequalities in access to 
the internet, and includes differential access to the tools, information, technologies, skills, capacities 
and agency in driving the direction of digitalization.54 There are also important facets embedded 
within this divide that include gender, age, income, language and culture that must be considered. 
As such, efforts to usher an access revolution to close the digital divide must include a number of 
parallel investments. First, addressing pervasive biases in Science, Technology, Engineering, and 
Mathematics (STEM) that have ripple effects throughout the digital ecosystem (e.g. algorithmic bias, 
lack of representation). Second, shifting resources, financial incentives and talent funnels to promote 
Equity, Diversity, and Inclusivity in STEM. Third, directing investments towards increasing availability 
and affordability of digital infrastructure where access is currently limited. A whole-of-society 
approach is necessary in order to leave no one behind.
PROBLEM 6  
Prevent Rights Violations: Protect human, civil and environmental rights. 
In a digitally connected world, the question of how to respect, protect and implement human 
rights and access to environmental justice is becoming paramount. As ever more human beings, 
organizational systems and technical devices transition online, realizing human rights in online 
settings is becoming an essential consideration in the emerging governance framework. Human 
rights such as freedom of expression, privacy, free assembly, child rights, Indigenous land rights, or 
the right to a fair trial, are all heavily impacted by new digital technologies. Three important domains 
in the digital space need specific attention linked to environmental and social sustainability. First, 
human rights abuses linked to land use conflicts in mining minerals needed to power a green digital 
future, including cobalt, graphite, copper, and rare earths, particularly in lands inhabited by and/or 
managed by Indigenous Peoples and local communities.55 Second, human rights violations in the 
form of digital surveillance and digital reprisals against environmental and human rights defenders, 
whistle blowers, journalists, and political dissidents. Third, violations of online data privacy by 
independent actors, private organizations and state governments. Human rights and access to 
environmental justice need to be safeguarded in the development, implementation, legislation, 
23and governance of digital technologies. They need to be entrenched and realized at every step of 
the value-chain of digital technologies.56 Priority needs to be made for a new generation of rights 
protection and grievance mechanisms in the digital age, as enabled by digital technology solutions 
such as secure multi-party computation as well as personal data control. Finally, children under 18 
make up one-third of all internet users,57 and youth (15-24 year olds) are the leading internet usage 
cohort. Globally, 71 per cent of youth use the internet, compared with 57 per cent of the other age 
groups.58 Considering both human and child rights, as enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child, is thus essential to create an inclusive and right-based digital environment for all. Priority 
must also be given to the application of CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance,59 and 
regulations around data must not just be limited to usage but considered to include (but not be 
limited to) environmental, social, economic, historical, cultural, and resource data. Such principles 
should consider the rights and protection of non-human entities.

24Shift 3: Accelerate Innovation 
Directing innovation efforts toward digitalization  
for sustainability  
6 INNOVATIONS
Planetary Digital Twin
Sustainable 
Circular Economy
Sustainable 
ConsumptionKnowledge 
Commons
Governance 
Breakthroughs
Green, Digital, Just 
TransitionShift 3
Accelerate 
Innovation
Digital 
sustainabilitySIX INNOVATIONS
Figure 6: Shift 3: Accelerate Innovation - Transform systems, incentives and business models 
through digital innovations for sustainability
The third shift calls for the digital innovation community, including governments, development 
partners, private sector, informal economy actors, local communities and academia, to channel large 
investments, capacity development and collective efforts toward digitalization for sustainability with 
intention. The application of digital innovations needs to focus on achieving the implementation of 
the 2030 Agenda with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals and to progress the different global 
environmental commitments adopted through multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs). 
This translates into the commitment to advance a decade of digital innovation for sustainability. 
Redirecting the innovative powers of digital technologies towards achieving our sustainability agenda 
in time and scale is absolutely key. Shifting the collective effort towards harnessing the potential of 
digitalization for systems level transformation is an important strategic priority for positive change 
towards a sustainable planet.
CODES stakeholders identified 6 strategic priorities where digital innovations can be proactively used 
to implement, accelerate and scale sustainability globally as part of this shift (see Annex 1, Table 3 
for an initial mapping of global stakeholders addressing this shift):
25INNOVATION 1  
Build Planetary Digital Twin: Prioritize innovations to measure, monitor and model 
the health of the planet’s biosphere and interactions with economic and social 
systems.
Digital twins combined with AI have the capability to conduct automated monitoring of risks and 
threats to key protected areas (either natural or cultural areas under global protection frameworks), 
ecosystem services or endangered species. Digital twins can also assist in understanding 
options and trade offs for achieving different SDGs and MEAs. This can benefit not only national 
governments, but also private sector companies, research institutions, non-profit organizations, and 
local communities (see Supplement 1, Box 16). However, many efforts continue to be fragmented 
and unable to connect in order to monitor planetary health in real time. Major investments are 
needed to build interoperable digital twins of the earth and its various subsystems that can allow us 
to monitor and model complex relationships among environmental, social, and economic systems 
using the best science and data available as well as robust data-protection rules.  First, investments 
to improve the sensing, connectivity and computational requirements for collecting and processing 
the vast volumes of data, especially for real-time data processing scenarios at a planetary scale. 
Second, adoption of transparency principles, data standards and safeguards, Open APIs (Application 
Programming Interface) and communication protocols that enable safety, privacy, interoperability, 
transferability, and quality control of key sustainability data across disparate systems. Third, 
ways to support, and integrate validated citizen science contributions and observations as well as 
other open-source tools and algorithms into the digital twin ecosystems. Finally, development of 
applications that enable real-time ingestion and processing of data from the digital twin ecosystem 
into governments, science, civil society, and private sector ecosystems and vice-versa to inform 
meaningful forms of analysis and decision support systems. 
INNOVATION 2  
Catalyse Sustainable Circular Economy:  Prioritize innovations towards an inclusive, 
net zero, sustainable circular economy.
Digital transformation is an opportunity to rethink how private sector business models can 
contribute to a sustainable circular economy and how companies can achieve full environmental 
transparency and accountability across their entire value chain. To achieve circular business models, 
innovations are needed on multiple fronts. First, the digital transformation process itself should be 
used as an opportunity for companies to identify concrete pathways to advance decarbonization, 
dematerialization, detoxification and circularity goals across their value chains. This should also 
include a transitioning away from the provision of products to offering services as part of circular 
business models. Second, digital standards and infrastructure are needed for digital product 
passports to hold data and relevant sustainability information on their lifecycle. This includes a 
product’s origin, composition, environmental and carbon performance, repair and dismantling 
possibilities as well as end of life handling. Third, increased use of eco-labels and provision of 
information from digital product passports to consumers to enable product comparability and 
inform decision-making in turn driving demand for sustainable products. Finally, aligning business 
models, financial and institutional procurement practices with sustainability goals, with the view to 
transitioning away from unsustainable products and services towards products and services that 
are fully Environment, Social and Governance (ESG) compliant. Ultimately, digital transformation 
should drive shifts toward a “beyond growth” paradigm where the application of digital technologies, 
in addition to profits, is baselined on social and environmental accountability with the goal of 
accelerating planetary sustainability and respecting planetary boundaries in the context of a circular 
economy (see Supplement 1, Box 17). 
26INNOVATION 3  
Empower Sustainable Consumption:  Prioritize innovations that empower sustainable 
lifestyles, behaviours and collaboration.
Digital tools can empower consumers to make and demand sustainable consumption choices and 
receive feedback on their behaviours. For example, digital applications embedded in e-commerce 
platforms such as product comparability, ethical nudging, gamification, carbon footprint calculators, 
positive feedback loops and green activations can support a shift in awareness and enable people to 
choose more environmentally sustainable products and services (see Supplement 1, Box 14). Social 
media, gaming platforms and fintech can also help amplify proof of environmentally sustainable 
lifestyles (see Supplement 1, Boxes 18 and 19). A range of digital marketplaces can also support the 
collaborative economy that enables giving, reselling, swapping, sharing and renting products and 
services directly between individuals. While strong privacy protection must be obligatory everywhere, 
digital innovations must be flexible enough to be adapted to the specific local, socio-economic, and 
geographic contexts on the basis of human-centered design and planetary boundaries. Digitalization 
also enables mass collaboration and mobilization of citizens through platforms enabling both citizen 
science and decentralized financing such as crowd funding. Opportunities to use digital technologies 
to empower sustainable lifestyles, behaviours and collaboration should be designed into digital 
platforms by default. They must become essential channels to influence sustainable consumption 
drivers at a planetary scale.  
INNOVATION 4  
Create Knowledge Commons:  Prioritize innovations towards a broadly accessible 
knowledge commons. 
Digital change continuously expands options to co-produce, process and share knowledge. Digital 
tools - from data collection and analysis, model building, knowledge aggregation, visualization to 
virtuality - can expand scientific methods in all disciplines, facilitate inclusive and cooperative forms 
of knowledge production (e.g. citizen and open science) and enable knowledge sharing across 
the globe for educational, scientific or practical purposes (see Supplement 1, Box 20). However, 
this valuable global public good needs to be actively built, managed and protected to serve as a 
strong lever for sustainability. It is yet too often challenged by a lack of understanding, accessibility, 
infrastructure and supportive framework conditions or by large public-private-imbalances towards 
well-resourced private innovation hubs (especially in tech-research and platform solutions). Inclusive 
and innovative knowledge commons will require: operationalized FAIR60 and CARE61 principles for 
data, public funding and data for open science, research and knowledge, open science standards, 
broad investments in digital literacy, education and digital knowledge access around the globe. 
Creating a global knowledge commons has vast potentials for sustainable development, the 
empowerment of marginalized and underrepresented groups, the creation of a global (environmental) 
awareness and empathy as well as breakthroughs in sustainability solutions. 
INNOVATION 5  
Support Governance Breakthroughs: Prioritize innovations towards a revolution in 
networked, agile and collaborative governance. 
Presently, many national laws, regulations and associated governance frameworks that implement 
global SDG and MEA commitments are not yet being designed to directly benefit from digital 
technologies, platforms, applications and SMART systems. Many national legal frameworks are 
still using traditional approaches for regulating the physical world while neglecting opportunities to 
harness digital tools to achieve sustainability outcomes and regulatory compliance.  
27As “whole of government” approaches to digitalization and e-governance are taken forward, a 
range of innovations are needed to catalyse a series of sustainability governance and rule of law 
breakthroughs. First, improving the ability of governance systems and regulations to dynamically 
adapt to changing sustainability risks and opportunities using real-time information feedback loops 
and AI in an agile and iterative manner (see Supplement 1, Box 21). Second, increased automation 
of Systems of National Accounts (SNAs)62 used to measure national economic activity with 
sustainability criteria included (see Supplement 1, Box 22). Third, transparent monitoring, reporting 
and verification (MRV) of legal compliance and progress towards national climate and sustainability 
goals as part of new accountability frameworks. Fourth, decentralized and distributed governance 
solutions to trigger and incentivize collective sustainability actions, finance and behaviours at scale 
through digital channels (see Supplement 1, Box 23). Finally, new digital mechanisms to support 
public participation in decision-making as well as crowdsourcing governance priorities and solutions 
from citizens and citizen science. None of this can be effectively done, however, without critically 
assessing how automated processes are designed, where data is sourced, what power dynamics are 
driving the governance systems we are seeking to optimize, and who is establishing environmental 
governance and sustainability goals. All of these governance innovations must prioritize the 
inclusion, ownership and agency of currently underrepresented groups, support subsidiarity and 
self-governance in an increasingly polycentric setting, and thoroughly account for integrated biases.63 
They must also help overcome the global-local divide by building inclusive fora connecting local 
interests with global decision-making. 
INNOVATION 6  
Realize Green, Digital, Just Transition: Prioritize innovations that catalyse the 
transition to a green, digital and just economy for sustainable development. 
Emerging and frontier economies may reap multiple benefits from ‘leapfrogging’ into SMART cities, 
buildings, transport, agriculture, etc (see Supplement 1, Box 24). In addition, a number of benefits 
can be captured by increasing access to energy for rural populations through digitally enabled off-
grid solutions and alternative financing mechanisms, enhancing resilience through risk-informed 
infrastructure planning and early warning, as well as supporting sustainable small-scale agriculture 
and realizing traceability from farm to fork (see Supplement 1, Box 25). Governments and businesses 
must prioritize investment into regionally relevant digital innovation that catalyses climate change 
mitigation and adaptation, and reduces impact on nature. Such innovation will need to happen with 
a healthy local digital innovation ecosystem, where local businesses, entrepreneurs and academia 
play a key role, and contribute to the co-creation of green digital jobs and livelihoods. Currently, 
the majority of digital technology innovation is happening within a few countries; thus, an active, 
progressive vision is needed working in parallel to Our Common Agenda to reverse the trends of 
innovation inequality. The global community should actively and comprehensively promote access 
to a broad scope of digital innovations for the “whole-of-society”. This is needed to empower local 
digital ecosystems to take part in technology development, promote open source or Digital Public 
Good approaches and capacity development, build investments and public funding to foster local 
digital innovation ecosystems, and establish multi-faceted partnerships. All these approaches must 
ensure truly inclusive bottom up perspectives that are locally driven and target improving livelihoods 
of the most marginalized. Women and youth literacy and capacity to benefit from these digital 
innovations will ensure technological uptake that is both sustainable and builds the social and human 
capital of those often left behind.
28
Impact Initiatives for a 
Sustainable Planet in the 
Digital Age 
Key Messages
This CODES Action Plan is an initial step forward to address these collective challenges and 
to catalyse collective action. It has identified  3 Systemic Shifts  essential to accelerating 
environmentally and socially sustainable development in the Digital Age: 1) Enabling Alignment: 
Aligning the digital age with sustainable development; 2) Mitigating Negative Impacts: Ensuring 
sustainable digitalization to mitigate negative environmental and social impacts; and 3) Accelerating 
Innovation: Directing innovation efforts and incentives toward digitalization for sustainability.
Based on our collaborative work on this Action Plan, the CODES community stresses some emerging 
overarching messages that are important to move into action together:
• Scalable Action Now: We now urgently need to catalyse all three shifts in concert and scale our 
efforts on our path towards a sustainable planet in the digital age. The world needs significant 
intellectual, financial, political and practical involvement as soon and as boldly as possible to 
provide the enabling foundations for a sustainable digital age. 
• Strong Movement with Common Commitment: We need awareness, convergence and 
cooperation of existing initiatives and networks of actors already undertaking ambitious digital 
sustainability initiatives in different sectors. This network is already growing quickly, but we need 
to support, connect and strengthen these aims, ambitions and achievements together. 
29Impact Initiatives
The CODES community has collectively identified 9 Impact Initiatives as a starting point to catalyse 
the 3 shifts and progress the 6 strategic priorities within each shift. Engagement with these initiatives 
provides numerous benefits and competitive advantages as the “whole-of-society” shifts towards 
recognizing the need and importance of growth that is sustainable, just and inclusive, to ensure 
long-term development and prosperity. The unique, global and multi-stakeholder alliance across 
public and private sectors facilitated through CODES creates a platform that is ideally positioned to 
galvanize critical progress towards digital sustainability. 
The set of Impact Initiatives emerging from this Action Plan are defined according to the following 
criteria:
• Multi-stakeholder: Multi-stakeholder in nature, meaning either a consortium of private or public 
sector entities, or public-private partnerships with opportunities for engagement by international 
actors and civil society
• Catalytic:  Aims to catalyse systems-level or sector-level transformations and impact at a global 
or regional scale 
• Sustained Attention:  Initiative requires sustained political attention and financial support (at 
least 3-6 years) to trigger systems-level or sector-level transformations
• Leadership: Clearly identified leadership, measurable goals, and multi-stakeholder governance 
model
• Accountable: Progress reported against key performance indicators (KPIs) and milestones in a 
format and frequency co-designed and determined in consultations with related stakeholders 
and CODES co-champions
• Intersecting: Are intersecting in nature and seek to enable approaches, policies, standards, 
regulations, infrastructure, and governance frameworks that are necessary to catalyse digital 
sustainability.• Diverse Leadership to Harness the Political Window of Opportunity:  We need to harness the 
political leadership of governments, academia, the private sector, and civil society to ensure 
that digitalization is used to promote a sustainable planet. Digitalization is not a single sector, 
but rather a process, and shaping it sustainably and equitably requires collective action, deep 
collaboration, and truly inclusive and globally representative leadership. As the digitalization 
process unfolds around the globe, we need to ensure that groups typically underrepresented in 
both the digital innovation space and the global environmental governance discourse are involved 
in shaping and influencing the outcomes. 
• Integration of digital sustainability needs within key international processes:  The vision 
outlined in this Action Plan should be systematically reflected within the preparatory process for 
the Summit of the Future and within the resulting Global Digital Compact in 2023. Other global 
fora and governance frameworks for digital transformation, sustainability, and environmental 
management should also engage with the tasks laid out in this Action Plan, including the Rio 
Conventions, the International Telecommunications Union and the Internet Governance Forum.
30The 9 Impact Initiatives here are developed to inspire and to provoke further concrete action by 
different pioneering coalitions. Neither the CODES co-champions nor the whole CODES network 
could drive and implement these initiatives alone. We now need even bigger coalitions, we need new 
partners, agile pioneers as well as capable established organizations; we need broader collaboration 
and truly global collective action.
World 
Commission 
on Sustainability  in the 
Digital Age 
ClearingHouse
for Digital
SustainabilityStandardsEducationfor DigitalSustainableDevelopment
Data and
Assessments 
as Digital 
Public Goods 
for SustainabilityDecentralized Financing
of Sustainable SolutionsDigital SustainabilityInnovation Hubs
and Accelerators
DigitalProductPassport
for CircularitySustainableProcurement
and Green
DigitalInfrastructure
PledgeHarmonization 
of Digital 
Companies’ 
GHG Inventories
Sustainable DigitalizationAlign Vision Values Objectives
Digitalization for SustainabilityMitigate Negative Im
pacts
Accelerate InnovationEnable Alignment
Figure 7: Nine Impact Initiatives of the CODES Action Plan for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital 
Age. All the listed impact initiatives are intersecting in nature and to varying capacities, seek to 
enable approaches, policies, standards, regulations, infrastructure, and governance frameworks that 
are necessary to catalyze digital sustainability. 
31Shift 1: Enable Alignment 
Create the enabling conditions to align the vision, 
values and objectives of the digital age with sustainable 
development
Impact InitiativeSuggested 
OutcomesPotential 
Timeline and 
Suggested KPIsEntities 
Active in this 
Area (*)
1. World Commission on Sustainability 
in the Digital Age:  
A science-based, globally 
represented commission supported 
by the UN, that in analogy to the 
famous World Commission on 
Environment and Development in the 
1980s (‘Brundtland Commission’) 
identifies key guidelines and 
recommendations for Our Common 
Future in the Digital Age. The 
commission’s interactive work 
programme and outcome can inform 
institutional updates within the UN, 
(inter)national policies, reporting 
standards, research agendas, and 
legislative frameworks at local, 
regional, and global levels. A science-based report 
on “Our Common 
Future in the Digital 
Age” to streamline 
the permanent and 
close alignment of 
digital transformation 
with sustainable 
development in the UN 
agenda and beyond.2022  
Start the process 
to define the scope 
and terms of 
reference
2023  
Establish World 
Commission in 
the context of 
the Global Digital 
Compact
2024  
Report “Our 
Common Future 
in the Digital 
Age” +UN/UNEA 
resolutionDigitalization 
for 
Sustainability
GPAI
International 
Resource Panel 
(**)
ISC
ITU 
OECD
UBA
World Bank
2. Clearing House for Digital 
Sustainability Standards:   
A new, multi-stakeholder and 
globally representative platform 
to co-define key standards for 
digital sustainability and economic 
circularity (taking into account the 
recommendations put forward by the 
World Commission). This clearing 
house would create an up-to-date, 
authoritative overview on global 
digital standards, to address key 
gaps, and conduct outreach to enable 
effective implementation across all 
concerned parties.A global platform to act 
as a clearing house and 
facilitate the exchange 
of digital sustainability 
standards and related 
legal frameworks with a 
focus on:
• Trustworthiness
• Inclusiveness
• Sustainability
• Interoperability 
• Safety and security
• Data privacy
• International 
collaboration2022  
Clearing house 
platform for 
existing standards
2023  
Consolidate 
standards and 
procedural 
capacity to enable 
implementation 
in specific 
sustainability 
area (e.g. circular 
economy)
2024  
Widening to include 
other sustainability 
areas; including 
capacity building 
programmes in 
partnership with 
stakeholdersIEEE
IETF
ISO
ITU (**)
OECD
323. Education for Digital Sustainable 
Development:  
A new decentralized approach to 
develop literacy and education 
programmes on digital sustainability 
with a focus on understanding and 
critically analyzing the benefits 
and harms of digitalization. These 
must be needs based, localized and 
contextualized. The focus must be 
on leveraging research and building 
skill sets needed to advance digital 
sustainability. This also entails the 
applied use of data and analytics 
as well as the build up of strategic 
multilateral partnerships and open 
source materials.A decentralized network 
of regional “education 
hubs” collaborating 
on developing joint 
contextualized 
curriculum on digital 
sustainability
An open source learning 
platform to host 
consolidated learning 
content from across the 
decentralized hubs2022  
Initiation of 
education hubs. 
Adoption of 
curriculum outline
2023  
Development 
of open-source 
modules
2024  
Integration across 
relevant training 
and research 
programmesCODATA
Digitalization 
for 
Sustainability
EO4GEO 
Alliance
Future Earth 
(**)
GIZ
ISC
ITU
SDA 
UNEP
UNESCO
World Bank
* Preliminary list based on stakeholder mapping and on initial discussions with partners subject to expansion  
** Entity has expressed interest in taking on a catalytic leadership role in the impact initiative

33Shift 2: Mitigate Negative Impact
A commitment to sustainable digitalization that 
mitigates the negative environmental and social impacts 
of digital technologies
Impact InitiativeSuggested 
OutcomesPotential Timeline 
and Suggested 
KPIsEntities 
Active in this 
Area (*)
4. Harmonization of Digital 
companies’ GHG inventories:  
New international platform(s) 
to facilitate harmonization, 
interoperability and adoption of 
GHG inventories and reporting 
standards for digital companies, 
products and services. This 
must be progressed by aligning 
reporting entities and regulators 
on adopting these standards 
while consolidating underlying 
data definitions and validation 
rules for similar environmental 
sustainability data elements and 
metrics.Creation and roll-
out of 2-3 global 
platforms allowing 
corporations to 
compare, combine, 
and share reliable 
net zero and 
sustainability data
Participation from 
70% of fortune 
200 and S&P 500 
companies2022  
Setup funding, 
programme and 
partners
2023  
Co-create focused 
products and processes 
with clear directionality 
on CC mitigation across 
all sectors
2024  
Expansion and 
implementationCarbon Call (**)
Climateworks 
Foundation 
Climate Change 
AI
Digital With 
Purpose (**)
GPAI 
ITU
Playing for the 
Planet
UBA
UN expert group 
on net-zero 
emissions 
commitments of 
non-state entities
UNEP
UNFCCC Climate 
Champions 
UNFCCC Global 
Innovation Hub
5. Sustainable Procurement and 
Green Digital Infrastructure 
Pledge:  
A new international framework 
to enable standardization and 
harmonization of sustainable 
procurement principles for digital 
infrastructure and services across 
governments and corporations. 
This must be advanced in parallel 
with a new framework for both 
public and private sectors to 
support planning, designing, 
financing and development of 
green digital infrastructure. An international 
framework detailing 
sustainable 
procurement 
principles for green 
digital infrastructure 
and related digital 
services2022  
Development 
of sustainable 
procurement principles 
for digital infrastructure 
and services
2023  
Sustainable 
procurement 
operational framework 
& infrastructure 
framework
2024  
Sustainable 
procurement and 
infrastructures 
compliance and 
reporting frameworkDigital Nations (**)
ITU (**)
IFC 
EU
OECD
Global 
Electronics 
Council / Green 
Electronics 
Council
Sustainable 
Digital 
Infrastructure 
Alliance (**)
UBA
UNDP
UNEP
World Bank (**)
346. Digital product passport for 
circularity:   
Initiate the design and 
development of standards and 
pilot testing for digital product 
passports as an enabler of the 
circular economy. Digital product 
passports should help companies, 
consumers and regulators, to 
keep track of a product’s climate, 
environmental, social and other 
impacts throughout the value 
chain. The standards must be 
sector/industry specific and must 
be accessible in a decentralized 
manner through a unique 
identifier, with the vision to enable 
transparency and circularity. Global inclusive 
process is 
established to 
co-develop digital 
product passport 
standards by 
governments, 
industry and civil 
society.2022  
Series of global and 
regional dialogues 
conducted on a digital 
product passport 
framework
2023  
Initiation of digital 
product passport 
standards in at least 
10 product categories 
with a high circularity 
potential
2024  
Pilot test digital product 
passport standards 
for at least 10 product 
categories.European 
Commission (**)
GS1
ITU (**)
UBA
UNEP
* Preliminary list based on stakeholder mapping and on initial discussions with partners subject to expansion  
** Entity has expressed interest in taking on a catalytic leadership role in the impact initiative
35Shift 3: Accelerate Innovation
Directing efforts and investments toward digital 
innovation that accelerates environmental and social 
sustainability
Impact InitiativeSuggested 
OutcomesPotential 
Timeline and 
Suggested KPIsEntities Active in 
this Area (*)
7. Digital Sustainability Innovation 
Hubs and Accelerators:   
Launch of a global network of 
connected, and collaborative 
Innovation Hubs to accelerate the 
development and scale up of digital 
tools and just solutions for national 
climate mitigation and adaptation 
goals and other environmental 
commitments. The hubs would 
build and scale opportunities for 
rural and urban climate action with 
a focus on supporting sustainable 
livelihoods, resilience and human 
wellbeing. This must be catalysed 
by international and national funds 
and private-public partnerships 
which provide the financial backing 
and incentives to stimulate green 
digital solutions and transformation 
innovations of key economic 
sectors, including the informal 
economy.Increase public 
digital innovation 
support with 
focus on climate 
and nature impact 
by 30% by 2025 
Network of 50 
interconnected 
regional and 
national hubs 2022  
Initial network of 
Innovation Hubs and 
Accelerators created 
2023  
Mapping of digital 
innovation funding 
opportunities to 
establish baseline
2024  
10% Increase 
in public digital 
innovation support 
targeted to climate 
and nature impact in 
developing countriesBMZ/GIZ
CGIAR Research 
Centers
D4D Hubs (**)
GCF
GEF
GIZ (**)
G-STIC
I-CoDI
ITU
New Bauhaus 
OECD Public 
Innovation 
Observatory
SIDA (**)
UNDP (**)
UNEP 
UNFCCC Global 
Innovation Hub
UNICEF
USAID
World Bank
8. Data and Assessments as Digital 
Public Goods for Sustainability:  
Development and launch of open 
global standards and governance 
frameworks for high value 
environment and climate data 
needed as digital public goods to 
drive sustainability assessments, 
(planetary) digital twins, global 
stocktaking, foresight analysis and 
decision-making. This must be 
accompanied by the development 
of open interoperable APIs to allow 
sharing and quality control of data 
between entities. A series of high-
value global data 
sets needed to 
enable digital 
sustainability 
decision-making 
are published 
as digital public 
goods.2022  
Initiation of a global 
dialogue on data 
infrastructure and 
standards
2023  
Prototype platform 
and publication of 
high-value digital 
public good data sets
2024  
Application of 
digital public good 
data to conduct a 
global stocktake 
on environmental 
sustainabilityCoData
Data4Development
Data4SDGs
DIAL
Digital Public Good 
Alliance
Global Environmental 
Outlook (**)
ISC
UBA
UNDP
UNEP
UN High-Level 
Committee on 
Programmes (HLCP)
World Bank
World Environment 
Situation Room (**)
369. Decentralized Financing of 
Sustainable Solutions:  
Facilitate new transparent 
decentralized financing and 
matchmaking for sustainability 
solutions. These include 
crowdfunding, payment for 
ecosystem services, microfinancing, 
recommendation algorithms and 
other channels. The goal is to 
increase decentralized sources 
of financing for the discovery,  
development and adoption of 
applied sustainable solutions, 
products and services in formal and 
informal markets. Digital platforms, 
NTFs and fintech 
include new 
algorithms, filters 
and mechanism 
that promote 
decentralizing 
financing for 
sustainability 
solutions that 
reach 1 billion 
people2022  
Build coalition of 
fintech, e-commerce 
and digital 
companies
2023  
Share lessons 
learned and identify 
successful influence 
pathways
2024  
Continue to scale 
initiativesConsumers 
International / Green 
Commerce Initiative
Dialogue on Global 
Digital Finance 
Governance
Every Action Counts 
Coalition (**)
Green Digital Finance 
Alliance 
UNCDF
UNDP
* Preliminary list based on stakeholder mapping and on initial discussions with partners subject to expansion  
** Entity has expressed interest in taking on a catalytic leadership role in the impact initiative

37Pathways to engage in the CODES Action Plan
The CODES co-champions will initiate and engage in multi-stakeholder processes to pool 
excellence and application-oriented knowledge on digital sustainability - the CODES Action Plan is 
an indicative example. 
The co-champions will act as high-level stewards of the Impact Initiatives highlighted within the 
Action Plan. They will convene relevant stakeholder groups to identify leadership organizations to 
advance the initiatives and monitor progress. The co-champions will work with stakeholders and the 
CODES community to identify, solicit and publicly promote emerging Impact Initiative opportunities 
on a rolling basis. CODES co-champions will further promote this Action Plan and will contribute to 
catalyse its key messages and Impact Initiatives in four main ways:
• Convene and connect a global community of common purpose to advance these 3 shifts; 
• Identify enabling policies and map stakeholders for each strategic priority; 
• Suggest impact initiatives as actionable items to concurrently progress strategic priorities;
• Foster and demonstrate political leadership in advocating for, and realizing the Impact Initiatives. 
Stakeholders can be public and private entities, including members from academia and civil society. 
They are invited to join and collaborate with CODES through 3, intersecting engagement pathways:
Tier 1 Catalyser of Impact Initiatives 
Stakeholders that are seeking to act in a leadership and catalysing capacity and/or as supporting 
entities to progress the advancement of Impact Initiatives highlighted within or emerging from 
the Action Plan. This will also include a willingness to participate in monitoring and transparent 
reporting to measure progress of the Impact Initiatives against key performance indicators. These 
accountability measures can be self-governed and/or leverage an adaptive learning framework 
to create regular opportunities for constructive reflection and analysis to make progress towards 
achieving their missions. The measurement metrics can be co-drafted with the organizations 
engaged in the impact initiative. The Catalysers will also have an opportunity to join the CODES 
external advisory board to provide ongoing guidance and strategic direction to the co-champions.
Tier 2  Action Network 
Stakeholders that are developing or implementing digital transformation and sustainability projects 
who are actively participating in the implementation of the 3 shifts outlined in the CODES Action Plan. 
This includes being listed as a formal CODES stakeholder in the online network map.
Tier 3  Advocates
Stakeholders that are engaging with the CODES network by sharing best practices and technological 
expertise as well as acting as advocates to support the CODES Action Plan. They actively promote 
the adoption of the shifts and related impact initiatives highlighted within the Action Plan within their 
own constituencies and networks. This includes contributing to and receiving the monthly CODES 
newsletter and the community of practice on www.sparkblue.org/CODES
38Annexures
Action Plan for a 
Sustainable Planet 
in the Digital Age
39Annex I: Stakeholder Mapping
Table 1:  Mapping of key Stakeholders and Initiatives Addressing Shift 1
Type of actor / 
InitiativeTitleStrategic 
Priorities
Digital Innovation 
and Acceleration 
Initiatives or 
Funding• Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN)
• UNDP Accelerator Labs
• OECD Mission Oriented Innovation Lab
• Digital4Development Hub
• United 4 Smart Sustainable Cities (U4SSC)
• BMZ Digital Transformation Centers• 4
• 4
• 4
• 4
• 4
• 4
Agenda Setting 
and Stakeholder 
Dialogue• Secretary General’s Digital Cooperation 
Roadmap 
• Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability 
(CODES)
• The Dialogue on Global Digital Finance 
Governance• 1, 4 
• 1, 4, 6
• 4, 6
Data, Analytics and 
Tools• Secretary General’s Data Strategy
• Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
Data
• UN Global Pulse
• Digital Public Goods Alliance  • 6
• 6
• 4
• 5, 6
Policies, Norms and 
Standards• The UN Environmental Assembly (UNEA)
• The International Telecommunications Union 
(ITU), Standardization Sector (ITU-T)
• UN Environmental Management Group (EMG)
• The Internet Governance Forum (IGF): Policy 
Network on the Environment
• The Global Partnership on AI (GPAI)
• OECD AI Policy Observatory
• European Council Conclusions on Digitalization 
for the Benefit of the Environment
• Principles for Digital Development
• Corporate Digital Responsibility 
• The International Sustainability Standards Board 
(ISSB) 
• Global Agreement on the Ethics of Artificial 
Intelligence• 1, 6
• 1, 6
• 1
• 1, 6
• 4, 6
• 4
• 4
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
40• Open Collaboration for Next Generation Digital 
Solutions for MRV
• Certified B-Corporation
• Science-based Targets Initiative• 5, 6
• 6
• 6
Advocacy • Digital Goes Green • 3, 5
Training • Atingi Digital4Sustainability Learning 
Programme
• Principles for Digital Development Training 
Programme 
• IEEE’s Course on Digital Transformation: Moving 
Toward a Digital Society
• Open SAP: Sustainability Through Digital 
Transformation
• ITU and UNDP’s digital capacity database• 2
• 2
• 2
• 2
• 2
Research and 
Knowledge• Future Earth  | Sustainability in the Digital Age 
• Digitalization for Sustainability – Science in 
Dialogue (D4S)
• International Society for Digital Earth
• Research Group on Digitalization and 
Sustainability Transformations, IASS Potsdam
• UNEP’s Global Environmental Outlook • 3
• 3
• 3
• 3
• 3
Collective Action 
Networks and 
Coalitions• Digital With Purpose Movement
• Every Actions Counts Coalition
• Green Digital Finance Alliance
• Global Enabling Sustainability Initiative
• Digital Future Society
• Greentech Alliance
• The Future Society
• UN Innovation Network• 5, 6
• 5
• 5
• 5
• 5
• 5
• 5
• 5
41Table 2:  Mapping of Key Stakeholders and Initiatives Addressing Shift 2
Type of actor / 
InitiativeTitleStrategic 
Priorities
Digital Innovation 
and Acceleration 
Initiatives or 
Funding• ITU’s International Centre of Digital Innovation 
(I-CoDI)
• ITU Partner Connect Digital Coalition• 5
• 5
Agenda Setting 
and Stakeholder 
Dialogue• ITU-T Focus Group on Environmental Efficiency 
for Artificial Intelligence and other Emerging 
Technologies
• UN E-waste coalition
• Roundtable on Global Connectivity within 
the Secretary General’s Digital Cooperation 
Roadmap
• Roundtable on Ensuring the Protection of Human 
Rights in the Digital Era within the Secretary 
General’s Digital Cooperation Roadmap• 1
• 2
• 5
• 6
Data, Analytics and 
Tools• CodeCarbon
• Carbon Mark
• Global E-waste Statistics Partnership• 1
• 1
• 2
Policies, Norms and 
Standards• ITU-T SG5: Environment Climate Change and 
Circular Economy, standards on:
• ITU-T L.1000-series: E-waste and circular 
economy 
• ITU-T L.1200 series: Power feeding and 
energy storage
• ITU-T L.1300-series Energy efficiency, smart 
energy and green data centers 
• ITU-T L.1400-series: Assessment 
methodologies of ICTs and CO 2 
trajectories  (for goods, networks, services, 
organizations, cities and sector levels)
• ITU-T L.1500 series: Adaptation to climate 
change 
• ITU-T L.1700 series: Low cost sustainable 
infrastructure standards
• ITU-D E-waste Policy Development
• Digital Nations - Sustainable Government 
Information Technology
• One Planet Programme on Sustainable Public 
Procurement (SPP)
• EU Green Public Procurement guidebook
• OECD green ICT assessments• 2
• 1
• 1
• 1, 2
• 1
• 1, 2
• 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
42Policies, Norms and 
Standards• OECD.AI Policy Observatory (Task Force on AI 
Compute & Environment)
• OECD Recommendations on Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) and the 
Environment 
• Principles for Green Software Engineering 
• European Committee for Standardization (CEN) 
Materials efficiency
• European Committee for Electrotechnical 
Standardization (CENELEC) Materials efficiency
• European Telecommunications Standardization 
Institute (ETSI) Materials Efficiency and Life 
Cycle Assessment 
• Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
• Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
Standard Association  (IEEE SA)
• Sustainable IT Pledge by the Canadian CIO 
Strategy Council
• Basel Convention on controlling transboundary 
movements of hazardous wastes and their 
disposal
• EU Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI
• Guidelines for sustainability information on 
e-commerce platforms
• Global Agreement on the Ethics of Artificial 
Intelligence
• World Wide Web Foundation REACT policy 
framework on Digital Inclusion
• Principles for Digital Development
• UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples (UNDRIP)
• Audit AI
• UNICEF Policy Guidance on AI for Children
• Responsible Data for Children
• OHCHR’s work on privacy in the digital age
• GESI Good Practice Guide on Remedy Human 
Right Impacts
• UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights
• Children’s Rights and Business Principles
• UNICEF: The Case for Better Governance of 
Children’s Data: A Manifesto• 1
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 2, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 2
• 3, 4
• 3
• 3, 4
• 5
• 5
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
Advocacy • Center for Humane Technology
• International Campaign for Responsible 
Technology 
• Center for Countering Digital Hate
• Alliance for Affordable Internet 
• Amnesty International
• Global Witness• 3, 4, 6
• 3, 4, 6
• 4
• 5
• 6
• 6
43Training • Open SAP: Clean-IT: Towards Sustainable Digital 
Technologies 
• Open SAP: Sustainable Software Engineering
• Principles for Digital Development• 1, 2
• 1
• 4
Research and 
Knowledge• UNFCCC Climate Action Pathways - ICT & Mobile
• Digital Goes Green
• ICT4S Research Community
• Digitalization for Sustainability – Science in 
Dialogue (D4S)
• Network for Digital Economy and Environment 
(nDEE)
• C-SERVES
• EFUTURES - Electronics for Sustainable 
Societies
• PARIS DE
• Global E-waste Statistics Partnership  | Global 
E-waste Monitors  | Regional E-waste Monitors
• FacProSUM Urban Mine Platformebook Climate 
Science Center
• Facebook Climate Science Center
• Google initiative on verified climate science
• Twitter initiative on authoritative climate info   
• ITU-T Joint Coordination Activity on Accessibility 
and Human Factors (JCA-AHF)• 1
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1
• 2
• 2
• 4
• 4
• 4
• 5, 6
Collective Action 
Networks and 
Coalitions• UNFCCC Race to Zero Climate Champions team
• Exponential Roadmap Initiative
• WBCSD Carbon Transparency Partnership
• United 4 Smart Sustainable Cities (U4SSC)
• Sustainable Digital Infrastructure Alliance
• Playing for the Planet Alliance
• Digital With Purpose Movement
• Green Software Foundation
• Global Enabling Sustainability Initiative
• Green 500
• Greentech Alliance
• ICT Pact
• Icebreaker One
• Carbon Call
• RE100
• GSMA
• Internet Governance Forum - Policy Network on 
Environment 
• Science-based Targets Network (SBTN)
• E-waste Coalition
• Circular Electronics Partnership
• WEEE Forum
• International POPS Elimination Network (IPEN)
• Partner Connect Digital Coalition• 1
• 1, 2
• 1
• 1
• 1, 2
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1
• 1
• 1
• 1, 2, 5
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 2
• 2
• 2
• 2
• 2
• 5
44Collective Action 
Networks and 
Coalitions• Digital Poverty Alliance
• ITU / UNESCO Broadband Commission
• Alliance for Affordable Internet
• Responsible Business Alliance
• Global Electronics Council • 5
• 5
• 5
• 6
• 1, 2
Table 3:  Mapping of Key Stakeholders and Initiatives Addressing Shift 3
Type of actor / 
InitiativeTitleStrategic 
Priorities
Digital Innovation 
and Acceleration 
Initiatives or 
Funding• UNDP’s Digital Transformation Initiative
• UNEP’s Digital Transformation Programme
• GIZ’s Innovation Challenge
• Ellen Macarthur Foundation
• Digital Public Goods Alliance
• United for Smart Sustainable Cities (U4SSC)
• UNFCCC Global Innovation Hub
• SITRA Sustainable Lifestyles• 1, 4, 5, 6
• 1, 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3, 5, 6
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 5, 6
• 2, 3, 5, 6
• 2, 3, 5, 6
• 3, 5
Agenda Setting 
and Stakeholder 
Dialogue• Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence 
(GPAI)
• Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability 
(CODES)• 1, 2, 3
• 2, 3, 5
Data, Analytics and 
Tools• Destination Earth - Digital Twin of the Planet
• System for Earth Observation, Data Access, 
Processing and Analysis (SEPAL)
• Big Earth Data Science Engineering Program 
(CASEarth)
• UNEP’s World Environment Situation Room
• Various applications of open data cube 
technology including Digital Earth Africa , Digital 
Earth Pacific
• Group on Earth Observations (GEO) work on 
Digital Earth
• Computational Sustainability
• International Society for Digital Earth
• Sustainability in the Digital Age
• Joint Centre for Excellence in Environmental 
Intelligence
• Alan Turing Institute Environment and 
Sustainability Interest Group
• UNDP Data Futures Platform, Green Recovery 
Data Hub
• UN Secretary General’s Future Labs• 1
• 1
• 1
• 1
• 1
• 1
• 1, 2, 3
• 1
• 4, 5, 6
• 1, 4, 5
• 1, 2, 3
• 1, 6
• 1
45• Global Initiative on AI and Data Commons
• Artificial Intelligence for Environment & 
Sustainability (ARIES) to support the System of 
Environmental Economic Accounting (SEEA)
• Microsoft Planetary Computer
• Google Earth Engine
• Nvidia Omniverse platform for digital twinning 
and 3D simulations 
• Amazon Sustainability Data Initiative 
• Salesforce Sustainability Cloud
• Global Open Science Cloud Initiative
• Future of Sustainable Data Alliance (FoSDA)
• Global Data Access Framework (GDAF)
• United Nations Satellite Centre UNOSAT
• Copernicus Open Access Hub
• Trase Earth• 1, 2, 3, 5
• 1, 5
• 1, 2, 4
• 1, 2, 4
• 1, 2, 4
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1, 2
• 1
• 1
• 1
• 1
• 2, 3
On Climate Change
• Camda Data 2.0 working group
• Climate TRACE 
• Climate Chain Coalition 
• Climate Change AI
• Centre for AI & Climate
• Climate Informatics 
• Icebreaker One
• Data Driven Lab
• Digital Public Goods Alliance - Climate Change 
Adaptation Community of Practice• 1
• 1
• 1
• 1, 3, 4
• 1, 3, 4
• 1
• 1, 2, 3
• 1
• 1, 4, 5
On Nature and Biodiversity
• Framework on Ecosystem Restoration (FERM)
• UN Biodiversity Lab
• IPBES
• Restor
• The Life Map
• e-shape
• Coordinadora de las Organizaciones Indígenas 
de la Cuenca Amazonica (COICA)
• Indigenia Mundus• 1
• 1, 4
• 1, 4
• 1
• 1
• 1
• 4, 6
• 4, 6
On Chemicals and Pollution
• Global Partnership on Marine Litter (GPML) • 1, 5
Policies, Norms and 
Standards• Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
Data
• Global Environmental Data Strategy requested 
by UNEA 4/23
• FAIR Principles for Scientific Data
• CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance• 1, 2
• 1, 2, 5
• 1, 2, 5
• 1, 2, 5, 6
46Policies, Norms and 
Standards• First Nations Principles of Ownership, Control, 
Access, and Possession (OCAP)
• ISC-CODATA’s Decadal Programme ‘Data for 
the Planet: making data work for cross-domain 
grand challenges’
• International Open Data Charter
• Data Interoperability Collaborative
• GS1 Digital Link
• ITU-T Study Group 5: Environment, Climate 
Change and Circular Economy
• ITU-T L.1000-L.1199 standards: set of 
standards that can form the basis for 
circular economy
• ITU-T L.1470 series to achieve net zero in the 
ICT sector
• ITU Sustainability passport for digital 
products
• ITU standards and guidelines on Green 
Procurement
• ITU-T Study Group 20: Internet of things (IoT) 
and smart cities and communities (SC&C) 
• ITU-T Y.4900 series: Evaluation and 
assessment of smart cities
• ITU-T Y.4903: Key performance indicators 
for smart sustainable cities to assess the 
achievement of sustainable development 
goals
• ITU-T Y.4904: Smart Sustainable cities 
maturity model
• Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Internet of Things (IoT) for Digital Agriculture 
(FG-AI4A) 
• Green Fintech Taxonomy
• Planet Mark
• Guidelines for Sustainability Information on 
E-commerce Platforms
• Consumers International - Digital Trust
• EU Digital Services Act
• EU Digital Markets Act
• UNEP Finance Initiative
• Responsible AI Strategy for the Environment 
(RAISE)
• EU Corporate Sustainability Reporting - Directive 
2014/95/EU Non-Financial Reporting
• EU Proposal for a Corporate Sustainability 
Reporting Directive (CSRD)
• UNESCO Recommendations on Open Science
• Open Science guidelines• 1, 2, 5, 6
• 1, 2
• 1
• 1
• 2, 3, 5
• 2
• 2
• 2, 3
• 2
• 2, 3
• 2, 3
• 2, 3
• 3, 6
• 2, 3
• 3
• 3
• 3
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3, 5
• 4
• 4
47• European Financial Reporting Advisory Group 
(EFRAG)/ Sustainability Reporting Board
• Digital Nations - Leading Digital Governments
• The GovLab
• Open Government Partnership:  workstream on 
digital governance
• Open North
• Principles and Recommendations to align 
BigFintech governance with the SDGs
• ITU and Digital Impact Alliance GovStack
• ITU GreenGovStack
• Digital Investment Toolkit
• Gender Equality in Digitalization (UNDP)• 5
• 5
• 4, 5
• 5
• 4, 5
• 3.5
• 5, 6
• 5
• 6
• 6
Advocacy • Digital Goes Green • 2, 3, 5
Training • EO4GEO Alliance
• Open SAP: Helping Business Thrive in a Circular 
Economy 
• ICLEI Europe: AI4 Cities
• ITU Centres of Excellence programme• 1
• 2
• 2
• 4, 6
Research and 
Knowledge• ICT4S Research Community
• UNESCO International Research Centre in 
Artificial Intelligence
• Digitalization for Sustainability – Science in 
Dialogue (D4S)
• International Resource Panel’s workstream on 
“Sustainable Trade in Resources: Global Material 
Flows, Circularity and Trade” 
• Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI)
• Alan Turing Institute Environment and 
Sustainability Interest Group
• ITU E-agriculture
• Climate Change AI
• ITU-T Study Group 5: Environment, Climate 
Change and Circular Economy 
• International Resource Panel’s workstream on 
“Sustainable Trade in Resources: Global Material 
Flows, Circularity and Trade”
• Green Digital Finance Alliance
• EU’s Regulations on Sustainable Finance
• E-mobility Toolbox
• Accelerating Access to Low Carbon Urban 
Mobility Solutions (ACCESS) through 
Digitalization
• UNDP Digital Readiness Assessment
• OECD International Programme for Action on 
Climate (IPAC)
• UNFCCC Resilience Frontiers• 1, 2, 3
• 4, 6
• 1, 2, 3
• 3.2
• 2, 3, 4
• 2, 4, 6
• 3, 4, 6
• 2, 3, 4, 5
• 2, 4, 6
• 2, 5
• 2, 5
• 2, 5
• 3, 6
• 3, 6
• 4, 5
• 2, 5
• 2, 5
48Research and 
Knowledge• UK Center for Greening Finance and Investment
• ITU and UNDP’s Digital Capacity Database
• AI Commons
• World Benchmarking Alliance
• EU Blockchain Observatory and Forum
• Ubuntoo - Environmental Solutions Platform 
• The GovLab  
• Focus Group on AI for Natural Disaster 
Management (FG-AI4NDM)
• Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Internet of Things (IoT) for Digital Agriculture 
(FG-AI4A)
• Latin American Institute of Terraforming• 2, 5
• 2, 4, 5, 6
• 5, 6
• 2, 5
• 4, 6
• 4, 6
• 2, 5
• 3, 5, 6
• 3, 5, 6
• 6
Collective Action 
Networks and 
Coalitions• Working towards a Digital Twin on Earth
• Greentech Alliance 
• European Green Digital Coalition
• WEF 2030 Vision
• Platform for Accelerating a Circular Economy 
(PACE)
• Circular Electronics Partnership (CEP)
• Digital With Purpose
• Icebreaker One
• Playing for the Planet Alliance
• Google Sustainability Choices - Green Apps
• Amazon Climate Pledge Friendly Products 
• Every Action Counts Coalition
• United 4 Smart Sustainable Cities (U4SSC)
• ITU and UNICEF Giga Connectivity
• Science-based Targets Initiative
• Climate Chain Coalition
• United Citizens Organization for Action for 
Climate Empowerment
• High-Speed Access for All: Canada’s 
Connectivity Strategy
• Digital Connectivity and Cybersecurity 
Partnership (DCCP)
• Technology for Development
• Digital Impact Alliance
• Digital Poverty Alliance• 1
• 2, 3, 4, 6
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 5, 6
• 2
• 2
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3
• 3
• 3
• 2, 3
• 2, 3, 5
• 4, 6
• 2, 3, 5
• 2, 3
• 5
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
• 6
49Annex II: Summary of Digital 
Transformation needs 
Identified by  the Stockholm+50 regional and 
national consultation process 
Asia and the Pacific
Regional Consultation 
Date4-5 April 2022
Shifting Markets and 
Consumer Behaviours• Develop key standards and use tracking software to ensure that supply chains 
are sustainable, and markets and producers are connected
Towards Sustainable 
Food and Agriculture• Leverage new data technologies, such as machine learning and digital mapping 
systems, in order to tackle key environmental issues, including food waste and 
plastic pollution
• Improve infrastructure to reduce food loss, and harness digital technologies for 
smarter food production and transport
Innovation-enabling 
Policy- and Regulatory 
Framework• Take into account the digital gap persistent in the region and note that 
digitalization needs to be carried out with clear rules on ownership and use of 
the data and knowledge
• Increase digital access, especially among those located in remote and isolated 
communities
• Develop best practices for using emerging technologies like blockchain for data 
logs
• Focus on the better or more regulated use of information and communication 
technology and digital platforms “at the nexus of sectors,” including water 
systems, agriculture, and supply chains
Accelerating and 
Scaling Environmental 
Sustainability• Use “internet of things” and digital dashboards to simultaneously manage 
energy- and water-related challenges
• Recognize that dependence on digital technologies comes with environmental 
and social costs, including those associated with the extraction of minerals and 
rare earths to produce digital gadgets and infrastructure, and the massive use 
of energy by blockchains
Digital Literacy, 
Capacity Building and 
Inclusiveness• Increase digital access, especially among those located in remote and isolated 
communities
• Leverage new data technologies, such as machine learning and digital mapping 
systems, in order to tackle key environmental issues, including food waste and 
plastic pollution
• Widen access to digital technologies as a means of complementing 
conventional classroom-based learning
• Introduce data centers and digital monitoring solutions to raise public 
awareness about key health and environmental challenges
• Promotion of digitalization in agriculture should take into account those who 
are left behind – “the bottom billion” without access to digital infrastructure or 
basic services, such as electricity and educationStockholm +50 Regional Consultation Outcomes on Digital Transformation
50Latin America and the Caribbean
Regional Consultation 
Date5-6 April 2022
Shifting Markets and 
Consumer Behaviours• Electronic waste problems must be addressed using circular economy 
principles
Innovation-enabling 
Policy- and Regulatory 
Framework• Analysis and regulate the risks that digital technology can pose by facilitating 
environmentally harmful development and financing
• Introduce technology that bridges gaps between people and sectors and helps 
communities
• All types of technology, including local and traditional science and technology, 
must be used
• Implement better resource management through the deployment of technology
Digital Literacy, 
Capacity Building and 
Inclusiveness• Support small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) using more formal 
business practices such as digitalization and banking. Technology that 
provides sustainable benefits for communities
• Recognition of technology and knowledge that can help people live 
harmoniously with nature, and active listening to Indigenous Peoples
• To address limited space and human capacity to face challenges and the 
gap between proposed solutions for issues such as climate change, and the 
availability of technology needed to tackle these
Africa
Regional Consultation 
Date12-13 April 2022
Innovation-enabling 
Policy- and Regulatory 
Framework• Spur enterprise by supporting rural communities access to digitalization and 
information technologies leveraging mobile tech platforms;
•  Use digitalization to innovate advancements in key growth sectors e.g., 
agriculture, manufacturing, and construction to protect ecosystems and 
support livelihoods
Accelerating and 
Scaling Environmental 
Sustainability• Leverage digitalization to establish robust participatory monitoring and 
evaluation of sustainable development interventions
Europe and North America
Regional Consultation 
Date5 May 2022
Shifting Markets and 
Consumer Behaviours• A globally fair and sustainable product liability insurance regime to accelerate 
dissemination of relevant technologies
Innovation-enabling 
Policy- and Regulatory 
Framework• Introduce better holistic scientific assessments, integrating both social and 
natural sciences, for planetary boundaries to better inform global governance;
• Deploy green digital solutions
• Funding and awards to promote and enhance innovation and innovative 
solutions
Accelerating and 
Scaling Environmental 
Sustainability• Use technology for the protection of the environment
Digital Literacy, 
Capacity Building and 
Inclusiveness• Promote the use of innovation and technology, including to increase 
transparency, traceability, and accountability along supply chains in order to 
support better engagement of stakeholders
• Capacity and technology must be aligned with local needs and priorities, not 
donor countries’ priorities
51West Asia
Regional Consultation 
Date11-12 May 2022
Shifting Markets and 
Consumer Behaviours• Step up climate and environmental protection ambition by accelerating action, 
such as by measuring, reporting, and verifying the objectives of the project 
to map 1000+ green buildings, neighbourhoods, and cities with technology 
promoting the “green buildings” concept
Towards Sustainable 
Food and Agriculture• Invest in access to energy-efficient and climate-smart technologies for small 
producers in agri-food value chains
• Promote recycling and digital transformation initiatives
Innovation-enabling 
Policy- and Regulatory 
Framework• Promote e-recycling, which “makes business sense,” and can lead to the 
formation of new enterprises
• Harness innovations and technologies, including digital technologies for 
transparency and disclosure
Accelerating and 
Scaling Environmental 
Sustainability• To scale up digitization to accelerate implementation of the environmental 
dimension of sustainable development in the context of the Decade of Action
Preliminary Synthesis on Digital Needs Emerging from 
National Consultation Processes
Methodology
UNDP provided direct support on the Stockholm +50 national consultation processes in 57 countries, 
out of which, 33 countries have submitted a preliminary draft consultation report by 23 May prior 
to Stockholm +50 meeting through UNDP country offices. The report template asked for broad 
challenges, opportunities, pathways and solutions for Green Recovery and transition into a green and 
inclusive future without any specific question on digitalization needs to avoid preempting solutions. 
This paper was prepared by UNDP as annex to the CODES Action Plan, and a final synthesis report 
will be prepared post-Stockholm +50 with a full analysis on digitalization needs.
Initial Findings
• Over 90% (30 countries) had one or more direct mention of digital technology and data needs, 
often across multiple sections of the draft report.
• Digital was rarely mentioned in the context of a challenge. Rather, it frequently appeared in 
questions asking for opportunities and solutions for scale up.
• Countries noted how lack of digital access and e-literacy amplified inequality and vulnerability 
during the Covid-19 pandemic.
• The most frequently mentioned digital need is digital / data management systems to monitor 
key environmental indicators including MRV systems. There is an overarching need to upgrade 
or modernize the existing systems as new data sources and more advanced analytics become 
available.
52• Countries note that data-driven studies and data disaggregation are key for policy making 
processes to ensure vulnerable or marginalized populations inclusivity.
• Many countries list digital technology needs coupled with needs for data and digital capacity 
development, not only in the public sector but also within communities and youth for ownership. 
Digital and data skills also frequently appeared in green jobs opportunities.
• Digital and transparency were key recommendations for improving sustainable supply chains 
(food, fashion, etc.). Other sectors with strong digital needs are agriculture and energy.
• Countries such as Mauritius and Rwanda, which are known for whole-of-society digital 
transformation efforts, have aligned policy recommendations, solutions and investment needs 
around digital technology for nature and climate. Countries may benefit from approaching digital 
transformation with a whole-of-society and foresight lens to get the most of its benefits.  
• Only one country mentioned e-waste as an issue for international cooperation. The potential 
negative environmental impact of digital technologies may require further awareness raising.
Country needs (opportunities, solutions, recommendations) on digital 
for nature and climate
Sustainable digital economy and green jobs
• Youth to drive the digital economy with understanding of nature and environmental challenges, 
with market-ready IT skills. (Mauritius)
• Transforming the productive matrix of the country, from an extractive model to a model with 
more value (more sustainable, inclusive, diverse, digitalized, e.g.). (Chili)
• It is important to readjust economic policies towards “greener and more digital” economies and 
not to come back to pre-pandemic levels. (Kazakhstan)
Environmental data monitoring systems
• Publicize relevant, timely and disaggregated data for evidence-based decision making, analysis 
and monitoring and evaluation as well as inclusive hearing and evaluation systems for public 
feedback on environmental legislation, planning, policies and projects. Leverage AI and digital 
tools to support actions against climate change and biodiversity conservation. (China)
• Baseline data development and administration allow to make visible the state or resources and 
their management, subsequently enhancing a more informed decision making with accurate data 
considering natural resource regeneration. (Mexico)
• Strengthening land cadaster to generate data must aid decision makers. (Liberia)
• This requires better data and information management ahead of time. (Viet Nam)
• Enhance the management of environmental and climate data and/or information of the country. 
(Somalia)
• Government should develop a single database platform for monitoring and effective monitoring 
purposes. In order to ensure observation, control and management of the condition and changes 
in the environment and its resources, a system of state environmental monitoring should be 
implemented. (Upgrade current system). (Kyrgyzstan)
• The establishment of a centralized transparency mechanism based on measurable monitoring 
indicators. (Algeria)
• MRV system based on user friendly IT system. (Ethiopia)
53Advanced analytics, modeling and forecasting for decision making
• The importation of essential equipment, such as supercomputers, which are essential for 
modeling the impacts of various environmental crises (climate change, loss of biological 
diversity, desertification, water stress, land degradation, etc.). The importance of equitable 
access to technical tools (software, applications, etc.), which are essential for the achievement of 
the environmental dimension of sustainable development. This concerns, for example, software 
for calculating greenhouse gas emissions, modelling tools, super calculators, systematic 
observation tools, etc. (Algeria)
• Data analytics and GIS to improve our capacity to analyze and project climate trends. 
(Philippines)
• Leverage Technology & Data Collection tools to adopt data-driven approaches and inform 
Covid-19 containment strategies and economic recovery. (Rwanda)
Digital application in key sectors
• Digital transformation is a key enabler. (Sri Lanka)
• Application of appropriate digital technology in key livelihood sectors including agriculture and 
tourism. (Thailand)
• SMART transport alternatives. (Philippines)
• Develop the E-commerce (food, clothing, materials, etc.) and digital marketing. (Cote d ‘Ivoire)
• Digitalization of various systems (such as supply chains). (Georgia)
• Driving the adoption of ICT for all businesses and citizens by scaling up existing e-government 
and private sector digitization efforts including E-Commerce Platforms and Digital Payments. 
Improve public transportation systems including increased number and efficiency of buses, 
linkage with payment system and better IT platform (application) for fleet management. 
(Rwanda)
• Emergence of new business opportunities: mobile vending, online businesses, etc. The recovery 
practices could be scaled up through development of ICT infrastructure. (Sri Lanka)
• Vulgarization of agro-technology (digital innovation for agriculture). (Cote d ‘Ivoire)
• Transition agriculture and waste management to a digital inclusivity and decentralized strategy. 
(Liberia)
• Accelerate transition to sustainable energy practices and digital transformation. (Mauritius)
Digital media, communication and engagement for a just transition
• Promote the role of digital media in disseminating and promoting biodiversity conservation and 
climate change concepts. (China)
• At the ages of digitalization, children and students would be more aware of environmental 
changes in the nature and how it is important to conserve the environment and biodiversity for 
future generations. (Kazakhstan)
• Vulgarise opportunities for benefit of all, using digital platforms and mass media to eliminate 
communication barriers. (Mauritius)
• The development of digital media to increase the active involvement of the population in public 
policy and practical measures for disseminating information were also highlighted. (Ecuador)
54Inclusivity of marginalized or vulnerable populations
• Generate public policies that have a focus on the whole of society, and are governed by the data 
and information available. A good example of this is the UNDP study “A green recovery from 
Covid19 in Costa Rica”, which shows how the implementation of the National Decarbonization 
Plan is a great opportunity to reduce the inequality gaps exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This study shows that with greater investments in decarbonization, people with medium and low 
job qualifications, as well as women, are the most benefited. (Costa Rica)
• Transition to youth, digital inclusivity and decentralization of NRM activities to facilitate 
ownership. (Liberia)
• Assessments, evaluations, studies, and other data collection efforts will be required to report 
gender and social inclusion progress to inform gender policy and planning. (Papua New Guinea)
• Empower the youth, the women, the marginalized and the general public to be more involved 
through citizen science; Digitalization of G2P interventions. (Philippines)
• Improve internet access for all, especially in rural areas. (Cote d ‘ Ivoire)
Digital and transparency of supply chain
• Digital transformation. (Sri Lanka)
• Local industries should decarbonise their supply chains and use ICT to modernize their 
operations, supported by IT skills development, capacity building, technology diffusion to create 
more decent work and quality jobs while digital networks and access continue to be upgraded. 
(Mauritius)
• Reduce the cost of the digital divide and promote access to affordable clean energy. (Mali)
• In order to achieve and create a better performing industry and supply chain, it is important to 
adopt visibility and traceability of the supply chain. (Kazakhstan)
• The digitalization of supply chain systems. (Georgia)
• Digital technology should be deployed to manage carbon emissions across the supply chain. 
(China)
Capacity needs
• Access to the latest technologies should be ensured through the sharing of best practices, but 
also through open access mechanisms the benefit of developing countries. (Algeria)
• Strengthen capacity through communication and training, including the establishment of data 
coordination and monitoring, for more evidence-based informed decisions. (China)
• Governments, educational institutions, and industry need to start implementing policies and 
programmes that increase the level of digital competence in countries. Core to developing such 
policies and programmes is the identification of national skills supply, skills demand, and skills 
gaps, which is required to develop targeted and effective action. Angola needs to first solve 
the basic problems of internet access and connectivity to then start implement more complex 
technologies. (Angola)
• Information and communication technologies (ICTs) are identified as being necessary to reduce 
transaction costs, both physical (e.g., transportation) and non-physical (information asymmetries, 
decision-making, etc.). (Argentina)
• Low access to the internet and digitalization which also affect their life conditions. Access to 
education and digital information, especially to women and people in rural areas are needed to be 
improved for future generations. (Kazakhstan)
55• Information, communication and digital technologies in the field of environment and climate 
change. (Mali)
• Lack of data is a significant country-wide problem that hinders data-driven decision making 
for sustainable development. Therefore, an effective information management system is an 
essential technological capacity needed to strengthen all dimensions of SD. / Capacity.  
(Sri Lanka)
• Capacity building of environmental and climate activists on digital technology are needed. In 
addition, Somalia needs technologies to measure air, water, soil and marine pollution, state of art 
technologies to support multi-hazards early warning system. (Somalia)
• Assistive technology and devices are not available locally / in communities that hinder PWD 
capacity to engage in the implementation of initiatives.  Need to develop incentives for 
manufacturers of these technology and make these devices more affordable for PWDs. Just 
transition could also focus on increasing skills of the communities, esp indigenous peoples (e.g. 
digital inclusion). (Philippines)
E-waste and negative impact of digital
• Disposal of used e-material and e-wastes. (Mauritius)
56References
1. Future Earth. Sustainability in the Digital Age. h ttps://futureearth.org/initiatives/other-initiatives/
sustainability-in-the-digital-age/  (Accessed: 14 February 2022). 
2. Mondejar, M. E., Avtar, R., Diaz, H., Dubey, R. K., Esteban, J., Gómez-Morales, A., Hallam, B., 
Mbungu, N. T., Okolo, C. C., Prasad, K. A., She, Q., & Garcia-Segura, S. (2021). Digitalization to 
achieve sustainable development goals: Steps towards a Smart Green Planet. The Science of the 
total environment, 794, 148539. h ttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.148539 .
3. PwC (2020). Over two-thirds of Sustainable Development Goals could be bolstered by emerging 
tech, including AI and blockchain. https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/news-room/press-releases/2020/
blockchain-sdgs-wef.html (Accessed: 14 February 2022). 
4. Other assessments have come to similar conclusions for example, the GESI Digital With 
Purpose Report (2019) found that 103 of the 169 SDG targets are directly influenced by seven 
digital technologies: digital access, faster internet, cloud, the internet of things (IoT), cognitive, 
digital reality, and blockchain. See also https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0048969721036111 ; https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-14108-y; https://eo4society.
esa.int/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/EO_Compendium-for-SDGs.pdf .
5. General Assembly resolution 48/13, The human right to a clean, healthy and sustainable 
environment, A/HRC/RES/48/13 (8 October 2021), available from undocs.org/A/HRC/RES/48/13 .
6. UN General Assembly (2015). Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. A/RES/70/1. 
7. United Nations (2020). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020. https://unstats.un.org/
sdgs/report/2020/  
8. United Nations Environmental Programme (2021). Making Peace With Nature: A scientific 
blueprint to tackle the climate, biodiversity and pollution emergencies. https://www.unep.org/
resources/making-peace-nature
9. International Telecommunication Union (2021). Facts and Figures Report 2021. https://www.itu.
int/itu-d/reports/statistics/facts-figures-2021/  
10. World Economic Forum (2021). The Global Risks Report 2021. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2021.pdf  
11. United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Capital Development Fund (2021). 
Towards an Inclusive, SDG-Aligned Governance of BigFintech. https://sdgfinance.undp.org/digital-
finance/towards-inclusive#summary  
12. United Nations Capital Development Fund (2021). Estimates of Global E-Commerce 2019 And 
Preliminary Assessment of Covid-19 Impact on Online Retail 2020. https://unctad.org/system/
files/official-document/tn_unctad_ict4d18_en.pdf 
13. Kepios Analysis (2021). Digital 2022 April Global Statshot Report. https://datareportal.com/
reports/digital-2022-april-global-statshot
14. Magna (2021). Global Advertising Market Reaches New Heights and Exceeds Pre-Covid Levels. 
https://magnaglobal.com/global-advertising-market-reaches-new-heights-and-exceeds-pre-
covid-levels/  (Accessed: 17 May 2022).
15. GeSI (2015). #SMARTer2030 report: ICT Solutions for 21st Century Challenges. https://
smarter2030.gesi.org/downloads/Full_report.pdf  
16. Graver, B., Zhang, K. and Dan Rutherford (2018). CO 2 Emissions from Commercial Aviation, 2018. 
The International Council on Clean Transportation. h ttps://theicct.org/publication/co2-emissions-
from-commercial-aviation-2018/
5717. Forti V., Baldé C.P., Kuehr R., and G. Bel (2020) The Global E-waste Monitor 2020: Quantities, 
flows and the circular economy potential. United Nations University (UNU)/United Nations 
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) – co-hosted SCYCLE Programme, International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) & International Solid Waste Association (ISWA), Bonn/Geneva/
Rotterdam.
18. Deloitte (2021). What is digital economy? Unicorns, transformation and the internet of things. 
https://www2.deloitte.com/mt/en/pages/technology/articles/mt-what-is-digital-economy.html.  
(Accessed: 17 May 2022).
19. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2021). Digital Economy Report 2021: 
Cross-border data flows and development: For whom the data flow. Overview. https://unctad.org/
system/files/official-document/der2021_overview_en_0.pdf .
20. Digital Tech ITP. Defining the Digital Sector. https://digitaltechitp.nz/defining-the-digital-sector/  
(Accessed: 17 May 2022).
21. Government of Canada (2021). Digital Technologies/ICT. https://ised-isde.canada.ca/site/digital-
technologies-ict/en
22. OECD (2019). Going Digital: Shaping Policies, Improving Lives, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.
org/10.1787/9789264312012-en .
23. Based on the definition provided in: Gather. Information Technology Glossary: Digitalisation. 
https://www.gartner.com/en/information-technology/glossary/digitalization   (Accessed: 17 May 
2022).
24. OECD (2019). Going Digital: Shaping Policies, Improving Lives, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.
org/10.1787/9789264312012-en .
25. Mondejar, M. E., Avtar, R., Diaz, H., Dubey, R. K., Esteban, J., Gómez-Morales, A., Hallam, B., 
Mbungu, N. T., Okolo, C. C., Prasad, K. A., She, Q., & S. Garcia-Segura (2021). Digitalization to 
achieve sustainable development goals: Steps towards a Smart Green Planet. The Science of the 
total environment, 794, 148539. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.148539 .
26. Ashutosh Gupta (2021). What is Digital Sustainability and How Does It Drive SDG Goals? Gartner. 
https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/what-is-digital-sustainability-and-how-does-it-drive-esg-
goals .
27. Wut, T.M., Lee, D.,  Ip, W.M., & S.W. Lee (2021). Digital Sustainability in the Organization: Scale 
Development and Validation. Sustainability 2021, 13, 3530. https:// doi.org/10.3390/su13063530 .
28. KPMG (2021). Digitalization can give direction to your sustainability transformation. https://home.
kpmg/be/en/home/insights/2021/07/sus-digitalization-can-give-direction-to-your-sustainability-
transformation.html  (Accessed: 17 May 2022).
29. Based on the definition provided in: https://www.sdp.digital/  (Accessed: 17 May 2022).
30. Dominik Pi étron, Philipp Staab, Florian Hofmann (2022). Sustainable digital market design: a data-
based approach to the Circular Economy. ECDF Working Paper Series #001, Policy Paper for the 
D4S-Network, 28th January 2022, Berlin. http://dx.doi. org/10.14279/depositonce-15014 .
31. Based on the definition provided in: https://arbor.bfh.ch/16649/1/IGF%202021%20PNE%20
Output%20Document.pdf  (Accessed: 17 May 2022).
32. Based on materials on https://digitalization-for-sustainability.com/  (Accessed: 17 May 2022).
33. Corporate Digital Responsibility (2021).The International CDR Manifesto. https://
corporatedigitalresponsibility.net/ .
34. United Nations (2020). Roadmap for Digital Cooperation. Report of the Secretary-General. 
https://www.un.org/en/content/digital-cooperation-roadmap/assets/pdf/Roadmap_for_Digital_
Cooperation_EN.pdf .
35. United Nations (2021). Our Common Agenda. Report of the Secretary-General. https://www.
un.org/en/content/common-agenda-report/assets/pdf/Common_Agenda_Report_English.pdf .
36. German Advisory Council on Global Change (2019). Towards Our Common Digital Future. Flagship 
Report. https://issuu.com/wbgu/docs/wbgu_hg2019_en?fr=sM2QyYzU1OTI4OA .
5837. United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Capital Development Fund (2021). 
Principles and Recommendations to align BigFintech governance with the SDGs. https://
sdgfinance.undp.org/digital-finance/principles . 
38. ITU. Study Group 5 at a glance. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/about/groups/Pages/sg05.aspx  
(Accessed:18 May 2022)
39. Stuermer, M., Abu-Tayeh, G. & T. Myrach (2017). Digital sustainability: basic conditions for 
sustainable digital artifacts and their ecosystems. Sustain Sci 12, 247–262. https://doi.
org/10. 1007 /s1 1625-016-0412-2
40. ITU-T (2020). Recommendation L.1470. Greenhouse gas emissions trajectories for the information 
and communication technology sector compatible with the UNFCCC Paris Agreement. https://
www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-L.1470-202001-I/en .
41. Andrae, A.S.G. (2020). New perspectives on internet electricity use in 2030. https://pisrt.org/
psrpress/j/easl/2020/2/3/new-perspectives-on-internet-electricity-use-in-2030.pdf .
42. Freitag, C., Berners-Lee, M., Widdicks, K., Knowles, B., Blair, G., & A. Friday (2021). The real climate 
and transformative impact of ICT: A critique of estimates, trends, and regulations. Patterns. 2. 
100340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100340 .
43. Digiconomist (2020). Bitcoin Energy Consumption Index. h ttps://digiconomist.net/bitcoin-energy-
consumption/  (Accessed: 15 February 2022). 
44. World Bank (2020). Minerals for Climate Action: The Mineral Intensity of the Clean Energy 
Transition. h ttp://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/961711588875536384/Minerals-for-Climate-Action-
The-Mineral-Intensity-of-the-Clean-Energy-Transition.pdf .
45. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2020). Digital economy growth and 
mineral resources: implications for developing countries. https://unctad.org/system/files/official-
document/tn_unctad_ict4d16_en.pdf .
46. Forti V., Baldé C.P., Kuehr R., and G. Bel (2020) The Global E-waste Monitor 2020: Quantities, 
flows and the circular economy potential. United Nations University (UNU)/United Nations 
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) – co-hosted SCYCLE Programme, International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) & International Solid Waste Association (ISWA), Bonn/Geneva/
Rotterdam.
47. World Economic Forum (2019). A New Circular Vision for Electronics, Time for a Global Reboot. 
https://www.weforum.org/reports/a-new-circular-vision-for-electronics-time-for-a-global-reboot
48.  Forti V., Baldé C.P., Kuehr R., and G. Bel (2020) The Global E-waste Monitor 2020: Quantities, 
flows and the circular economy potential. United Nations University (UNU)/United Nations 
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) – co-hosted SCYCLE Programme, International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) & International Solid Waste Association (ISWA), Bonn/Geneva/
Rotterdam.
49. Kunkel, S., & D. Tyfield (2021). Digitalisation, sustainable industrialisation and digital rebound – 
Asking the right questions for a strategic research agenda. Energy Research & Social Science, 
Volume 82, 2021, 102295, ISSN 2214-6296, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102295 .
50. Coroama, V., & F. Mattern (2019). Digital Rebound - Why Digitalization Will not Redeem us 
our Environmental Sins. In “Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on ICT for 
Sustainability(ICT4S 2019) (Editor Wolff, Annika). CEUR Workshop Proceedings Volume 2382. 
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2382/ .
51. Kepios Analysis (2021). Digital 20222021 AprilOctober Global Statshot Report. https://
datareportal.com/reports/digital-2022-april-global-statshot . https://datareportal.com/reports/
digital-2021-october-global-statshot .
5952. Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., and S. Aral (2018). The spread of true and false news online. Science 
359(6380), 1146–1151 (2018)
53. Stop Funding Heat (2021). In Denial - Facebook’s growing friendship with climate misinformation 
report. https://stopfundingheat.info/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/in-denial-v2.pdf .
54. Gigler, B-S. (2011). Informational Capabilities : The Missing Link for the Impact of ICT on 
Development. E-Transform knowledge platform working paper; no. 1. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
© World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/19011  License: CC BY 3.0 IGO
55. Church, C., and A. Crawford(2018). Green Conflict Minerals: The fuels of conflict in the transition to 
a low-carbon economy. International Institute for Sustainable Development. 
56. Here due diligence requirements as outlined by the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the EU Directive on human rights 
due diligence, among others, can be instructive.
57. Livingstone, S., Carr, J. and J. Byrne. (2016). One inThree: Internet Governance and Children’s 
Rights. Innocenti Discussion Paper No.2016-01, UNICEF Office of Research, Florence.
58. International Telecommunication Union (2021).  Facts and Figures Report 2021. https://www.itu.
int/itu-d/reports/statistics/facts-figures-2021/ . 
59. CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance. https://www.gida-global.org/care .
60. FAIR Guiding Principles for Scientific Data Management (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, 
Reusability). https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/ .
61. CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance (Collective benefit, Authority to control, 
Responsibility and Ethics). https://www.gida-global.org/care .
62. The SNA provides an overview of economic processes, recording how production is distributed 
among consumers, businesses, government and foreign nations. It shows how income originating 
in production, modified by taxes and transfers, flows to these groups and how they allocate these 
flows to consumption, saving and investment. Consequently, the national accounts are one of the 
building blocks of macroeconomic statistics forming a basis for economic analysis and policy 
formulation.
63. Kloppenburg, S., Gupta, A., Kruk, S. R. L., Makris, S., Bergsvik, R., Korenhof, P., Solman, H., & 
Toonen, H. M. (2022). Scrutinizing environmental governance in a Digital age: New ways of 
seeing, participating, and intervening. One Earth, 5(3), 232–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
oneear.2022.02.004 .
60Contributors
This Action Plan was co-created by an 
incredible network of passionate people wanting 
to collaborate to shape a sustainable and green 
digital future. While the Action Plan co-creation 
process was opened to 1,000 stakeholders from 
the CODES community, the following individuals 
deserve specific acknowledgement for their 
contributions, engagement and commitment to 
collective action. “Never doubt that a small 
group of thoughtful, committed 
citizens can change the world; 
indeed, it’s the only thing that 
ever has.”
Margaret Mead 
CODES Action Plan Coordination Team
David Jensen , United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Shivam Kishore , United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Reina Otsuka , United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Marcel Dorsch , Umweltbundesamt/German Environment Agency (UBA)
Nilufar Sabet-Kassouf , Future Earth and Sustainability in the Digital Age
Megha Sud , International Science Council (ISC)
CODES Secretariat Contributors
Robert Opp , Chief Digital Officer, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Dirk Messner , President, Umweltbundesamt/German Environment Agency (UBA)
Philip Thigo , Senior Advisor, Innovations and Open Government - Presidency - Kenya
Éliane Ubalijoro , Executive Director of Sustainability in the Digital Age and Global Hub Director, Canada, 
Future Earth
David Jensen , Digital transformation coordinator, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Reina Otsuka , United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Marcel Dorsch , Umweltbundesamt/German Environment Agency (UBA)
Megha Sud , International Science Council (ISC)
Shivam Kishore , Digital Transformation Advisor, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Nilufar Sabet-Kassouf , Future Earth & Sustainability in the Digital Age
Nilushi Kumarasinghe , Future Earth and Sustainability in the Digital Age
Geoffrey Boulton , International Science Council (ISC) and University of Edinburgh
Heide Hackmann , CEO, International Science Council (ISC) 
Ben Larroquette , United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Christian Löwe , Umweltbundesamt/German Environment Agency (UBA)
Catherine P. McMullen , independent expert 
Dirk Osiek , Umweltbundesamt/German Environment Agency (UBA)
Stephanie d’Arc Taylor , United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Jason Jabbour , United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Polina Koroleva , Digital Transformation Junior Professional Officer, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP)
61Technical Contributors 
Adriana Miranda Castillo,  Techno Psychology, Humane Technology & Lean Agile Transformation Coach
Afi Edoh , Student, Dakar Institute of Technology (DIT)
Aiaze Mitha , Digital Finance and SDG Expert, Environmental Digital Innovations Expert, Emerging 
Markets Fintech Entrepreneur
Aidin Niamir , Scientist, Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Institute, Germany
Alan Kaydul , Technical Advisor, Digitalization Division, Swiss Foreign Ministry of Federal Affairs
Alexandrine Fayet Boggiano , Programme Manager, Operations Digital Transformation (ICRC)
Alison B. Lowndes , Senior Scientist, Global AI, NVIDIA
Almut Nagel , Green Digital Transformation Policy Advisor, DG CONNECT, European Commission
Amanda Miner , Geospatial Innovation Expert, GIS Services Manager, Envicom Corporation
Amy Luers , Global Lead, Sustainability Science, Microsoft
Anders Sul Thuesen Schmidt , Head of Corporate Citizenship & Responsible Business DK, Accenture
Andrea Hinwood , Chief Scientist, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Andre Uhl , Chair, IEEE Earth Lab
Andrew Zolli , Chief Impact Officer, Planet
Andy Middleton , Chief Exploration Officer, TYF Group, a Certified B Corporation
Ashbindu Singh , Environmental Pulse Institute
Asim Hussain , Chairperson, Green Software Foundation
Athur Mabiso , Senior Economist, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
Babatunde Abidoye , Global Policy Advisor, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Bahtiyar Kurt , Regional Technical Support Specialist, Energy, United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP)
Benjamin Larroquette , Regional Technical Advisor for CCA, Nature, Climate and Energy team, United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Bjorn-Soren Gigler , PhD, Head of Data Economy and Blockchain Programs, GIZ and Adjunct Professor, 
Georgetown University
Brennan Van Dyke , Chief, Capacity Development and Innovation Branch, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP)
Btissam Benkerroum , Economist, African Development Bank
Carly Gilbert Patrick , Team Leader, Active Mobility, Digitalization & Mode Integration, United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP)
Carolin Frankenhauser , Digital Analyst, Chief Digital Office, United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP)
Cheikh Tidjane N’dongo , Acting Head of Food Security Unit, African Union Development Agency (AUDA-
NEPAD)
Chibulu Luo , Programme Manager, Energy, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Christian Jølck , Co-founder and Partner,  2150, Climate Tech Investor
Christina Bowen , Co-founder, product research and public engagement, Socialroots
Cristina Bueti , Counsellor, International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Cyril Caminade , Research Associate, Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics
Dagim Terefe , Freelance journalist
Dario Piselli , Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies
Dave Thau , Data and Technology Global Lead Scientist, World Wildlife Fund (WWF)
David Rolnick , Assistant Professor, McGill University and Co-Founder, Climate Change AI
Dr. Indranil Nath , Chartered Fellow, BCS, The Chartered Institute for IT
Dr. Karen Bakker , Author, Professor & Researcher of Environmental Governance & Innovation, University 
of British Columbia
Dr. Odilia Coi , Director of Innovation, MKAI, Author on Digital Trust, Guest Lecturer, University of Cagliari
62Dr. Shivam Gupta , Bonn Alliance for Sustainability Research, University of Bonn, Germany
Edward Darling , The Life Map,  Redlist Revival 
Enrico Panai , Data and AI Ethicist
Eric Hansel , Founder, Esgdao and The Scubaverse
Ervin Pfeifer , International Research Centre in Artificial Intelligence under the auspices of UNESCO
Eun Joo Lee , Business Analyst, United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
Felipe Gusmao , Professor, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Brazil
Felix Creutzig , Groupleader MCC, Berlin; Chair Sustainability Economics of Human Settlements, TU 
Berlin
Femi David Ogunnigbo , Field Operations Officer/Environmental Consultant, Going Green International 
Consults Limited
Ferdinando Villa , Ikerbasque Research Professor, Basque Centre for Climate Change
Flurina Wäspi , Institute for Public Sector Transformation, University of Bern
Francesco Gaetani , Regional Science Policy Coordinator, United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP)
Franco Donati , Postdoctoral Researcher, Institute of Environmental Science (CML), Department of 
Industrial Ecology, Leiden University and Member of Science for Democracy
Gandhar Desai , Analyst, Sustainable and Digital Agriculture, United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP)
Gavin Starks , CEO, Icebreaker One
Georg Kell , Chairman of the Board at Arabesque, Founding Director of the United Nations Global 
Compact
Gertjan van Stam , Independent Consultant
Graham Gannon , Head of Engineering, Global Sales/Marketing Platforms, Google
Guillaume Soto-Gomez , IT Consultant for NGO, Shauri-CC / Well Grounded
Hannah Kromminga , GIFTD, Greentech Alliance
Hannah Mueller , Sustainable Digital Development, GIZ
Héctor Tuy , Organismo Indígena Naleb’, Guatemala 
Himanshu Shekhar , United Nations University - Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-
EHS), Bonn, Germany  
Ilias Iakovidis , Green Digital Advisor, DG CONNECT, European Commission
Isabelle Albert , Author Tech IT Green, COO Satgana Climate VB & fund
Jacob Baraza , Expert in Water Governance, Transboundary Water Conflicts and Cooperation
Jake Reynolds , Executive Director, Sustainable Economy, Cambridge Institute for Sustainability 
Leadership
James Castillo , Filmmaker, Flowerman productions
Jan Kennis , Digital For Development Lead Expert, Enabel
Jasmin Nussbaumer , Institute for Public Sector Transformation, University of Bern
Jean-Noé Landry , Obama Scholar, Obama Foundation and Columbia University in New York City and 
Former Executive Director, Open North
Jim Fruchterman , Founder/CEO Tech Matters, responsible for the Terraso Integrated Landscape 
Management Platform of the 1000 Landscapes for 1 Billion People Initiative 
Johannes Leon Kirnberger , AI & Sustainability Consultant at OECD.AI and Research Associate, Global 
Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI)
Karine Perset , Head, OECD.AI Policy Observatory and Network of Experts
Karl Burkart , Co-Founder and Deputy Director, One Earth
Katherine A. Foster , Open Earth Foundation and Social Alpha Foundation
Kathryn Sforcina , Global Head of Strategy at IV.AI
Kathleen Buckingham , Director, Sustainability, Tentree & Veritree
63Katie Gibson , Vice President, Strategy and Partnerships, CIO Strategy Council, Canada
Kavinda Gunasekara , Associate Director, Geoinformatics Center at Asian Institute of Technology
Kay Poh Gek Vasey , CEO, MeshMinds
Kenyatta Mirindi , Digital Business Analyst
Laure Berti-Equille , Researcher, Institute of Research for Development, France
Laurent Durieux , SDG Coordinator, Group on Earth Observations (GEO)
Leah Bunce Karrer , Senior Environmental Officer, Global Environment Facility (GEF)
Ligia Noronha , United Nations Assistant Secretary-General and Head of the New York Office of the 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Loïc Modoux , Political Advisor, Digitalization Division, Swiss Foreign Ministry of Federal Affairs
Lubomila Jordanova , CEO & Co-Founder Plan A & Co-Founder Greentech Alliance
Ludgarde Coppens , Head of the SDG and Environment Statistics Unit, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP)
Ludmilla Diniz , Energy and Climate Technical Specialist, United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP)
Luis Neves , CEO, Global Enabling Sustainability Initiative (GESI)
Luisa Teixeira , Project Manager, Vizzuality
Maria de la O Laura del Carmen Cuevas Cancino Esteva , Tecnológico de Monterrey, Mexico
María Emilia Burgos , International Policy Analyst & Program manager for SDGs (The Kootneeti)
Marianne Haahr , Executive Director Green Digital Finance Alliance (GDFA)
Marija Pujo Tadic , International Institute for Climate Action (IICA) - founder & president - Croatia/EU
Markus Böhm , Digital transformation, Swiss Federal Office for the Environment
Marta Ottogalli , Knowledge Manager Consultant, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Martin Smith , Project Director, The Carbon Mark
Mateo Dugand , EMEA Sustainability Regional Lead, Amazon Web Services (AWS)
Mateo Salomon , Global Energy & Finance Advisor, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Matt Greenspan , Telecommunications Management Group (TMG)
Matthias Stürmer , Professor, Bern University of Applied Sciences, Head of the Institute for Public 
Sector Transformation of BFH and Head of the Research Center for Digital Sustainability, University of 
Bern
Max Schulz , Executive Chairman, Sustainable Digital Infrastructure Alliance 
Mélisande Teng , PhD Student, Mila
Michael J. Oghia , Independent, ICT sustainability advocate
Michael Stanley-Jones , United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Miroslav Polzer , CEO, International Association for the Advancement of Innovative Approaches 
to Global Challenges IAAI GloCha & Founder, United Citizens Organization for Action for Climate 
Empowerment 
Mónica Miguel-Lago , European Association of Remote Sensing Companies (EARSC)
Neil Davis , Software Engineer, Microsoft
Nicolas Miailhe , Co-Founder & President, The Future Society
Nigel P. Melville , Program Director, Design Science, Associate Professor of Information Systems,
Nikola Nikačević , Professor, University of Belgrade and Founder of Eon+ (Digital ESIA - Envigo)
Paz Peña O , Coordinator, Latin American Institute of Terraforming
Pernilla Bergmark , Principal Researcher ICT Sustainability Impacts, Ericsson
Pierre Boileau , Head of the Global Environment Outlook, United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP)
Pilar Fajarnes , Chief, Digital Economy Policy Research Section, United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (UNCTAD)
Pooja Munsi , Head of Web, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Priya L. Donti , Ph.D. Candidate, Carnegie Mellon University and Co-Founder, Climate Change AI
64Priynka Sharma , Assistant Lecturer, University of the South Pacific
Rajiv Garg , Climate Technology Center and Network (CTCN)
Rebaone Ferguson , Human Rights Officer, Office for the High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR)
Régia Estevam Alves , Specialist Researcher in Land Degradation, YouthMappers Regional Ambassador
Reyna Ubeda , Project Officer, International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Rianne C ten Vee n, Independent Interdisciplinary Consultant
Richard Matthew , Associate Dean of Research and International Programs and Professor of Urban 
Planning and Public Policy in the School of Social Ecology, University of California, Irvine
Richard T. Jordan , Royal Academy of Science Intl. Trust, Chief of UN Operations
Rob Price , Co-founder of Corporate Digital Responsibility
Robert Amahirwe , BI and Data Analyst, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Rosie McDonald , E-waste Data Associate Officer, International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Ross School of Business, College of Engineering, University of Michigan
Ryan Boudinot , Founder, Chief Executive Officer, Machines & Dreamland
Rudradeb Mitra , CEO, Omdena
Sally M Solaymantash , Technology Consultant
Samuel Adunreke , Executive Director, Innovea Development Foundation    
Sara Di Lonardo , Researcher, Italian National Research Council-Research Institute on Terrestrial 
Ecosystems (CNR-IRET)
Sary Qasim , MENA Region Lead, Government Blockchain Association GBA
Satya Das , Digital Economist
Severin Sindizera , Global Coordinator, Indigenous Peoples Global Forum for Sustainable Development, 
IPGFforSD 
Sherwood Moore , Communication and Community Engagement at ICANN, Linux Hyperledger Climate 
Action and Accounting Special Interest Group Co-chair 
Simon Gardner , Head of Digital Environment, Natural Environment Research Council (NERC)
Somya Joshi , Head of Division, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI)
Sreekanth Venkataraman , Independent Digital Expert
Stefanie Kunkel , Research Group “Digitalization and Sustainability Transformations” at the Institute for 
Advanced Sustainability Studies (IASS), Potsdam, Germany   
Stefano Balbi , Researcher, Basque Centre for Climate Change
Stephanie Race , Founder & CEO, Earth Labs Group
Steve Vosloo , Digital Learning, Innovation and Policy Specialist, United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) 
Steven Stone , Deputy Director, Economy Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Terry Gunning , Senior Managing Partner, Technology, DXC
Theresa Schwarz , UN Global Pulse, Finland
Tim Frick , Advocate for the Responsible, Equitable, and Sustainable Use of Design and Technology, 
Certified B Corp Owner 
Tim Scott , Policy Advisor, Environment, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Tom Baumann , Co-Founder and CEO of ClimateCHECK, Co-Chair of Climate Chain Coalition
Vanessa Gray , Head of the Division for Environment and Emergency Telecommunications, International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU)
Vasudev Bhandarkar , CEO ScoreData Corporation
Vlad Coroama , Lecturer in Smart Energy and Digitalization & Sustainability, ETH Zurich
Yaxuan Chen , United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Zeinab El Maadawi , Professor, Cairo University and Digital Learning Expert at UN
65CODES Communication Products
Alison Meston , International Science Council
Andrew Raven , Writer, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Beverley McDonald , Report and Graphic Design, Communication Division, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) 
Daniel Cooney , Director, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
David Cole , Head of Social Media, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) 
Dylan Lowthian , Head of Media, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Fan Zhang , Office of the UN Secretary-General’s Envoy on Technology
Josie Raine , Communication Specialist, Nature Climate and Energy Team, United Nations Development 
Programme (UNDP)
Katie Elles , Head Writer, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Keishamaza Rukikaire , Head of News and Media, Communication Division, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) 
Kelvin Memia , Web Developer and Digital Marketing support, Communication Division, United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Maria Vittoria Galassi , Digital Transformation Account Manager, Communication Division, United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Martin Ittershagen , German Environmental Agency
Mia Dee Foster , Senior Multimedia Producer, Communication Division, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) 
Miranda Grant , Head of Multimedia, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) 
Moses Osani , Public Information Officer, Communication Division, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) 
Nancy Groves , Chief of Digital Strategy, Communication Division, United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) 
Neha Sud , Chief of Content, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Patrick Kihara , Writer, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Pooja Munshi , Head of Web, Communication Division, Digital Transformation Taskforce, United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Rachelle Fox , Future Earth & Sustainability in the Digital Age
Sahya Haria , Social Media, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Tal Harris , Media Engagement, Communication Division, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
Digitalization is one of the most important drivers of economic, social and environmental transformation. It 
has given rise to powerful general-purpose technologies such as artificial intelligence and cloud computing 
that offer revolutionary scale and potential. Digital transformation is globally pervasive, increasing 
productivity, disrupting pre-existing business models and leading to diverse innovations with profound 
implications for the human future. This transformation has enormous potential to support progress towards 
sustainability however in its current form, it continues to enable and/or encourage unsustainable practices 
that are degrading natural systems, entrenching inequality and undermining human wellbeing. 
There is an urgent need to reverse these negative trends and to utilize the potential of digital transformation 
as a vital tool in developing globally sustainable economic and social behaviours. We need to move the 
focus away from the pursuit of short-term, unsustainable gains towards the achievement of long-term 
values-driven sustainable outcomes. Three systemic shifts are needed to harness digital transformation as 
a positive and exponential force for progressing environmentally and socially sustainable development. 
• Shift 1 Enable Alignment: Create the enabling conditions to align the vision, values and objectives of 
the digital age with sustainable development;
• Shift 2 Mitigate Negative Impacts:  A commitment to “sustainable digitalization” that mitigates the 
negative environmental and social impacts of digital technologies;
• Shift 3 Accelerate Innovation: Advancing investments in “digitalization for sustainability” to accelerate 
the development and deployment of sustainability-driven digital innovation.
Within each shift, this Action Plan identifies six strategic priorities that must be addressed during the 2022-
2025 timeline together with 9 global Impact Initiatives to catalyse systemic transformations. The Coalition 
for Digital Environmental Sustainability (CODES) will contribute the implementation of this Action Plan in 
four ways:
• Convene and connect a global community of common purpose to advance these 3 shifts; 
• Identify enabling policies and map stakeholders for each strategic priority; 
• Suggest Impact Initiatives as actionable items to concurrently progress strategic priorities;
• Foster and demonstrate political leadership in advocating for and realizing the Impact Initiatives. 
All stakeholders are invited to engage in the CODES Action Plan in one or more of the following channels:
• Catalyser:  Stakeholders seeking to engage directly with one or more of the Impact Initiatives that are 
proposed in the Action Plan.
• Action Network:   Stakeholders contributing to and leveraging the 3 shifts proposed in the Action Plan to 
support the progression of digital sustainability. 
• Advocates: Stakeholders seeking to contribute their expertise to the CODES community and become an 
advocate for the CODES vision and values.
More information is available on  
the CODES Community Page on  
www.sparkblue.org/CODES
