 
1 
  
 
IGF LEADERSHIP PANEL  
CONTRIBUTION TO CONSULTATION ON THE  
GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
 
 
Introduction 2 
Support for the Global Digital Compact  2 
Future of Internet Governance Forum  2 
Connecting All People and Safeguarding Human Rights  4 
Avoiding Internet Fragmentation 6 
Governing Data and Protecting Privacy  7 
Enabling Safety, Security and Accountability  9 
Addressing Advanced Technologies, including Artificial Intelligence  11 
Other issues  13 
 
  

 
2 
 Introduction  
In line with the mandate of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) and as recommended in the 
Secretary -General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation, the United Nations Secretary -General has 
established the IGF Leadership Panel as a strategic, empowered, and multistakeholder body . 
Among the key functions of the IGF Leadership Panel are the responsibility to provide strategic inputs and advice on the IGF; promote the IGF and its outputs; and exchange IGF outp uts from the Forum 
with other stakeholders and relevant fora, and facilitate the feeding of input of these decision -makers 
and fora to the IGF’s agenda- setting process, leveraging relevant MAG expertise.  
In this context  and based on  existing  IGF outputs , the Leadership Panel is pleased to make the 
following contribution to the ongoing consultation of the United Nations on the Global Digital 
Compact . This contribution is based on the IGF 2022 messages, as agreed by the participants to the 
IGF in Addis Ababa.  IGF messages are a summary prepared by the IGF secretariat after each annual 
IGF meeting, which are commented on and agreed by the multistakeholder community.  
Support for the Global Digital Compact  
The Leadership Panel strongly welcomes the initiative of the United Nations Secretary -General to 
propose a Global Digital Compact  in the report on Our Common Agenda. We welcome the focal value 
the Global Digital Compact, and by extension the digital transformation , the internet and new 
technologies have  in the Summit of the Future , scheduled to be held in September 2024.  
The Global Digital Compact should represent important steps towards achieving the UN Sustainable Development Goals . Beyond this, the Global Digital Compact should not only recommend guidi ng 
principles  for the internet of the future, but should identify clear and concrete actions  to achieve its 
objectives, including metrics to measure progress towards achieving these goals.  
The GDC  should reaffirm the MSH model of Internet Governance , all while following a multi-
stakeholder approach in its’ genesis . The Leadership Panel would urge the Global Digital Compact 
facilitators to explore possibilities for the whole multistakeholder community to be involved in the 
Global Digital Compact process, be yond the consultation phase . We therefore call for a dedicated 
Multistakeholder Drafting Group to support the development of the Global Digital Compact, once the 
formal consultations are complete. While negotiations will take place among Member States in  the 
UN General Assembly, the multistakeholder community should have the opportunity to meaningfully 
feed into their discussions. We recall that, while the GDC will be adopted by governments, 
implementation and monitoring will be undertaken by the whole mult istakeholder community, and 
as such, their perspectives should be fully represented throughout.  The IGF 2023 in Kyoto can play  an 
important role in this regard.  
Future of Internet Governance Forum  
The Leadership Panel supports the Internet Governance Forum and its global, national and regional initiatives as vital fora  for multistakeholder debate and policy discussions  that can inform policy 
development across the world . The Global Digital Compact s hould reaffirm the definition of 
multistakeholder internet governance as agreed in the Tunis Agenda as well as reaffirm the 
importance of the Internet Governance Forum . At the same time, the Global Digital Compact should 
 
3 
 not touch upon the mandate of the I nternet Governance Forum, which is to  be renewed in the 
WSIS+20 process.   
We recommend that the IGF be used as a follow -up and evaluation platform for the Global Digital 
Compact  beyond its adoption in 2024, as all stakeholders present at the IGF will have a role to play in 
the implementation of the GDC.  
  
 
4 
 Connecting All People and Safeguarding Human Rights  
IGF recognises that the digital divides within and between countries and regions remain powerful 
actors affecting national and international development,  including progress towards the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Meaningful access extends well beyond issues of connectivity 
and includes aspects of divide that cur across various parameters, including  issues of accessibility, 
affordability, conte nt, services, digital literacy and other capabilities as well as connectivity, especially 
in the Global South. The digital gender divide must be eradicated, including efforts to reduce gender -
based violence online. Human Rights must be protected online by all stakeholders, including by 
expanding opportunities for education and digital skills.  
 
OVERCOME THE DIGITAL DIVIDE  
Core  Principles:  
• The Digital Divide should be overcome among geographical regions, but also within 
societies, where some groups have less meaningful access, including women, individuals in 
vulnerable situations, and vulnerable and marginalized communities . Meaningful access 
must be a guiding principle for conn ecting peoples, especially the Global South , and must 
address such issues as accessibility, affordability, content, services, digital literacy and other 
capabilities as well as connectivity.  
• Meaningful access includes aspects concerning access to informati on, services, digital literacy, 
and other capabilities in relation to digital inclusion and capacity development that go beyond 
the issue of connectivity.  
 
Key commitments:  
Targeted  initiatives in infrastructure , devices and services can help to improve a ccess for the non - or 
less-connected. Governments should protect and promote required infrastructure , along with 
support from the private sector, including – by means of innovative investment models – in rural areas. 
Cooperation  among stakeholder groups is  important in ensuring and enabling access: governments 
and multistakeholder partners should contribute to the establishment and work of effective 
regulatory agencies and frameworks, address challenges in commercially unattractive areas, and 
encourage inno vative approaches to connectivity.  
 
PROTECT WOMEN’S RIGHTS  
Core  Principles:  
Concepts of gender equality, inclusion and women’s and girl’s rights and protection should be incorporated into the Global Digital Compact : the threat of violence and harassment is a deterrent 
to women’s and girls’ online participation. The role of technology services and platforms in 
propagating gender -based violence should be acknowledged and addressed.  Also, buil t-in bias in 
algorithms re inforces existing structures of discrimination based on gender and have to be  urgently 
addressed.    
 
5 
 Key commitments:  
• All stakeholders should contribute to ensure that the gender digital divide is eradicated.  
• The GDC should call upon all stakeholders to  work together towards  eradicat ing the digital 
gender divide.  Every member of society, especially the most marginalized must have equal 
access to digital technologies, services and skills. Digital services should be tailored and 
accessible for all women and g irls.  
• Governments should commit to promote digital, sciences and technology education for girls . 
All stakeholders have a role to play in ensuring the tech nology  and innovation sectors are 
attractive  to and welcoming of women.  
• All stakeholders should comm it to making digital technologies safer for women, more 
transparent and accountable and to ensure that no bias is embedded into algorithm -based 
technologies.  
• Finally, governments, together with all stakeholders, must establish clear accountability for all  
forms of online discrimination, including violence, against women.   
 
PROTECT HUMAN RIGHTS  
Core  Principles:  
The Global Digital Compact should reaffirm the fundamental principle that all human rights that apply offline also apply online.  Respect for h uman rights must be  a key consideration for  new and emerging 
technologies  from the moment of their design  throughout their  entire  life-cycle. Governments are 
responsible to ensure that human rights are respected, protected and promoted while b usinesses are 
obliged to comply with all applicable laws and to respect human rights.  Blanket Internet shutdowns are not consistent with international human rights law  and undermine the achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals by e.g. hindering ac cess to health and education,  access to 
information etc. . Any restriction must be lawful, suitable and legitimate, necessary, proportional, and 
non-discriminatory.  
Key commitments:  
● Transparency, accountability, and human rights due diligence are the responsibilities of all 
stakeholder groups, including intergovernmental and international organisations, 
governments and the private sector, the technical community and civil society.  
● governments must ensure that any restriction of i nternet access is strictly compliant with the 
principles of legitimacy, adequacy, necessity, proportionality and non -discrimination . States 
should avoid recourse  to  limit ing access to the internet at all costs , because of negative 
impacts on both human ri ghts , sustainable development  and economic welfare. Social media 
and technology companies should explore all legal options for challenging requests for 
shutdowns  and support citizens in their advocacy efforts concerning shutdowns.  
● All stakeholders can and should contribute to realizing the potential of the internet and digital 
technologies for enhancing rights to education, helping smaller and local businesses take 
advantage of the digital economy , and improve access to training in digital technologies to 
support the labo ur market to adapt to new paradigms.  
● Standards development organisations should introduce processes to ensure due 
consideration of human rights  in their work , including by invit ing participation of experts in 
human rights, from all stakehold er communities.  
 
6 
 Avoiding Internet Fragmentation  
IGF holds as a core principle that the internet must be global, open , free  and interoperable, supported 
by common technical standards and protocols. Such standards, including those for content and 
services, must be consistent with the rule of law  and international human rights.   
 
ADDRESS INTERNET FRAGMENTATION  
Core  Principles:  
● The Global Digital Compact should reassert the value of a global  open, free, interoperable 
internet for the realisation of the UN Charter, the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals, and the exercise of human rights. Furthermore, the many aspects of 
internet fragmentation should be the focus of multistakeholder attention: technical, 
commercial and policy considerations can all contribute to a fragmented internet.  
● Net neutrality, non -discriminatory traffic management, infrastructural and data operability, 
and platform and device neutrality are all important components of an overarching policy framework to support an open, interoperable internet.  
Key commitments:  
● Effective multistakeholder governance mechanisms are essential for the gove rnance of a 
global unfragmented Internet.  
● The multistakeholder community must remain vigilant  against new or developing risks of 
internet fragmentation. In this regard, the Leadership Panel welcomes the work done by the IGF Policy Network on Internet Fragm entation, and encourages the continuation of this work, 
to support governments, private sector, civil society and the technical community to be aware 
of possible threats to the open internet.  
● While legal and regulatory approaches may differ among jurisdictions, concerted effort must 
be made to maintain active policy compatibility at the global level , to ensure that 
fragmented approaches do not threaten the global reach and interoperability of the internet. Maintaining the integrity of the  global network requires international collaboration and 
consensus on basic principles. In addition to international regulatory collaboration, 
frameworks must keep pace with rapid change in technology and service s.  
● Cyber -diplomacy networks and mechanis ms should support the regulatory framework to 
protect the open and interconnected internet; standards development organisations should maintain active engagement and outreach to improve understanding and collaboration between the technical community and po licymakers.  
  
 
7 
 Governing Data and Protecting Privacy  
IGF recognises the centrality of data in today’s economy and society, and the fundamental role of data 
in the future. Data are a critical resource, and data flows can be a vital element  for international 
cooperation (e.g. scientific research, law enforcement, and national and global security), and can 
support with management of transversal crises such as pandemics and climate change. IGF recognises that data can generate both profit and social value, but  that issues of data poverty and the protection 
of the right to privacy and personal data can cause populations to be left behind economically, and 
erode trust in the digital economy.  
PROTECT PRIVACY  
Core  Principles:  
Privacy is not only an individual right but also a social value  and should be  considered with a whole -
of-society approach and not restricted to governments . Privacy laws should be substantial, evidence -
based and subject to  clear enforcement , accountability and remedy . Laws shou ld ensure that data 
flows and data exchange can take place without compromising on security and data privacy, and that 
internet access and use should not be dependent on data -tracking. Furthermore, personal data should 
not be exported into jurisdictions wh ich do not provide adequate guarantees.  
Key commitments:  
• Policies, developed through meaningful multistakeholder input, must  ensure the protection 
of personal data . Independent oversight bodies should be established and enabled with 
adequate resources.  
• The private sector must endeavour to adopt a privacy -by-design approach in its innovations 
and developments to safeguard the rights of users.  
ESTABLISH GOOD DATA GOVERNANCE  
Core  Principles:  
●  Policies should ensure that individuals have agency over their personal data and that privacy 
protections contribute to a safer and more prosperous global digital economy. 
Interoperability and compatibility of approaches to data governance would help achieve a 
balanced approach in which data work for people and the plane t.  
● Transparency, participation and accountability are important aspects of good data 
governance . This includes consideration of standards, sharing, interoperability, security, 
privacy, infrastructure, fairness, transparency and explicability, data minimization, and quality 
and accuracy.  
● Current multilateral, regional and bilateral trade agreements are insufficient to enable current 
and future cross -border data flows: there is thus a growing need to develop and harmonise 
measures to manage cross -border data flows  with trust and  in full respect of personal data 
protection.  
Key commitments:  
● Policies for good data governance should be designed with the full input of the 
multistakeholder community , including regulators, researchers, standards development 
organisations, consumer organisations, end -users, private sector and civil society.  
 
8 
 ● Polic y frameworks should enable the free- flow of data  across borders with trust , underpinned 
by the highest standards of personal data pr otection, in order to allow for the full benefits of 
e-commerce and digital trade to be realised , in addition to the realisation of development 
goals . 
  
 
9 
 Enabling Safety, Security and Accountability  
IGF recognises the multifaceted nature of the threats on the internet, including cybersecurity 
(protection of networks and data), misinformation and disinformation, and other safety 
considerations. This encompasses the ongoing problem of cyber -attacks, whether perpetrated by 
individuals or state -sanctioned. Furth ermore, there should be a harmonised approach to protect 
victims, particularly women and girls, and to empower women to lead in the digital space.  
 
IMPROVE CYBERSECURITY  
Core  Principles:  
● Cybersecurity should be seen as a central challenge for internet policy  and the digital 
transformation  as a whole . Ensuring cybersecurity  and preventing cybercrime are both 
important areas of policy requiring a high level of expertise and multistakeholder input . 
● Whole -of-government and whole -of-society approaches  are required, which include strong 
partnerships and coordinated efforts, involving parliaments, regulators , the judiciary, law 
enforcement and other relevant government agencies, the private sector, technical 
community, academia and civil society.  
Key c ommitments:  
● Standards that enable cybersecurity , in particular the UN normative framework of 
responsible State behaviour in cyberspace,  are essential  for an open, secure and resilient 
internet that enables social progress and economic growth, and are particularly important for 
those not yet connected. The Global Digital Compact should promote such standards  and 
related advocacy and capacity -building activities .  
● The Global Digital Compact and multistakeholder community should contribute to raising 
awareness  among policymakers and other stakeholders  of the challenges of cybersecurity 
and of  existing  international norms  and principles.  
COMBAT CYBERCRIME  
Core  Principles:  
Regulations  meant to  counter cybercrime should be proportionate , human rights compliant and 
sensitive to the size, capacity and resources of service providers , with legal  obligations considering the 
diversity of the  private and  technical sector.  
 
Key commitments:  
Governments and policymakers  should ensure that legal re sponses to cybercrime  safeguard both the 
rule of law and human rights , taking freedom of expression fully into account.  
COMBAT DISINFORMATION AND ILLEGAL CONTENT  
Core  Principles:  
Disinformation should be addressed through risk -based mechanisms  while protecting freedom of 
expression , pluralism and democratic process.  
 
10 
 Key commitments:  
● The multistakeholder community should collaborate to improve media and digital literacy 
skills , which empower citizens to take a more critical view of the content of information they 
encounter, helping to identify misinformation and strengthen democratic p articipation. 
Educational curricula  should also include digital literacy skills that help children to be safe 
online.  
● Policies should take full account of the technical landscape, recognizing that the domain name 
system  has limited technical capacity in t his context – stakeholder dialogue should continue 
to clarify when and how it may be used to remedy specific content problems. Encryption also 
plays an important role in building an open, safe and democratic internet. It has the ability to 
validate provenances and bona fides as well as protecting information from unauthorized 
access.  
  
 
11 
 Addressing Advanced Technologies, including Artificial Intelligence  
IGF recognises that new digital technologies are increasingly shaping our economy and society, 
including AI systems. Taking advantage of the opportunities offered by advanced technologies, while 
addressing related challenges and risks is a task that no one actor can take up on its own. 
Multistakeholder dialogue is required to ensure that these technologies ar e developed and deployed 
in a manner that is human -centric and respectful of human rights.  
 
DEVELOP HUMAN -CENTRIC AI  
Core  Principles:  
Advanced technologies, including artificial intelligence, should be designed in a way that respects the rule of law, human rights, democratic values and diversity, and includes appropriate safeguards. Risks, including bias, should be mitigated in design an d implementation of such technologies, with the 
objective of protecting vulnerable and marginalized groups.  
Key commitments:  
● Governments, together with the whole multistakeholder community, should work together 
to progress towards internationally agreed norms and standards to govern the 
implementation of AI.  The Global Digital Compact should recognize existing and ongoing 
efforts and processes.  
● Capacity -building is of the utmost importance: AI literacy, skills development and langu age 
resources for minority languages must be priorities for education and training policies.  
ENSURE TRUST  
Core  Principles:  
● Transparency in the operation, explainability and reporting of algorithmic systems is essential 
for human rights.  
Key commitments:  
Stakeholders from technical and non -technical communities should share expertise and work together 
to develop principles, guidelines and standards that are sufficiently flexible for application in diverse 
contexts and foster trust in AI systems.  
PROTECT RIGHTS IN CONTENT MODERATION 
Core  Principles:  
Policies on content governance by online platforms, and their governance, should be designed in line 
with international human rights standards.  
Key commitments:  
● Automated tools employed to moderate online content, such as AI applications, should be 
used in a context of transparency , accountability and oversight. Unintended consequences of 
 
12 
 such technologies, which can be particularly detrimental in times of conflic t or crisis, should 
be avoided.  
● Technical standards play an important role  in enabling the development and enhancing the 
value of digital technologies and related infrastructures, services, protocols, applications and 
devices. Effort should be made to ensu re that such standards are set in transparent and clear 
processes, to take human rights concerns fully into consideration and encourage full 
participation from all stakeholders , including financial support  for expert participants from 
governments, academia, private sector, technical community and civil society.  
 
  
 
13 
 Other issues  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY AND CLIMATE CHANGE  
Core  Principles:  
● Digitalisation provides opportunities, tools and devices to combat and adapt to climate 
change, including the use of environmental data to mitigate climate change, data to manage 
food and water systems, support the circular economy, and reduce e -waste  
 
Key commitments:  
● The enabling role of digital technologies and the ICT ecosystem should be recognised and 
harnessed in public policy, to allow for the development of impactful new applications to 
combat the effects of climate change  
● A more extensive use of new technologies, in the appropriate legal framework, should be 
encouraged, as a way to achieve sustainability and drive digital inclusion.  
● Stakeholders should agree upon a core set of environmental variables, which are 
systematically collected, shared, and validated on a global basis. This should be published as 
Digital Public Goods for the benefit of all. The roles of such stakeholders as collective data-
stewards of digital public goods should be developed through a multi -stakeholder process. It 
should seek to include, collect, and utilise environmental data under clear principles and 
procedures, within a human -centric  framework.  