 
 Fuxi Institution’s Inputs on the Global Digital Compact  n Connect all people to the Internet, including all schools l Core principle I: Enhance and innovate the building of digital infrastructure  Key commitments: (1) Relevant governmental departments should enhance Internet access policies and provide funds support for underdeveloped areas. (2) ICT & Internet enterprises should be encouraged to strengthen development and increase investment in areas with low Internet access rates. (3) Enterprises and technical communities should be encouraged to carry out R&D on critical technologies and systems which meet future needs and explore the building of new digital infrastructures such as the data interoperability system (DIS). l Core principle II: Adhere to digital inclusion and bridge the digital divide Key commitments: (1) Relevant governmental departments, international organizations, and industry organizations should take measures (such as developing policies, launching capacity building projects, etc.) to effectively improve 
 
the digital literacy and digital skills of all, including the elderly, women and the disabled, and bridge the new digital divide in knowledge, skills, risk awareness and security capability. (2) Relevant entities such as ICT enterprises and intelligent device manufacturers should consider the characteristics and needs of vulnerable groups such as the elderly and the disabled in technology & application innovation and device manufacturing, to guarantee that they can fully share the convenience of digital technology. (3) Young people around the world should be encouraged to take active actions to find solutions in dealing with the digital divide. n Data Protection	Data, as a key resource in the digital age, has become a new production factor. Effective use of data could promote economic growth, drive technology and application innovation, and improve the efficiency of governance, at the same time, the impact it has or maybe generate(d) should also be considered. The principle of equal emphasis on development and security should be upheld, and a balance between data protection and data utilization should be sought. An effective and comprehensive strategic framework for data governance should be built, data policies and laws should be developed, to ensure data protection as well as data utilization, and serving in dealing with the common challenges faced by mankind. l Core principle I: Balance security and development 
 
Key commitments: (1) The positive role of data in economic and social development should be fully recognized. While ensuring data security and protecting personal information, system construction and technology innovation should be encouraged and strengthened to promote the utilization of data. (2) Relevant entities should adopt data classification system to protect data. (3) More attention should be paid on the requirements for data authenticity, accuracy, and standardization, so as to improve the quality and interoperability of data and data sets. The innovation of underlying data infrastructure should be encouraged. l Core principle II: Adhere to multi-party data governance approach Key commitments: All activities related to data in its creation, circulation, storage to utilization is completed by multiple participants, which results in the fact that data is widely existing in terminals, networks, platforms, systems and controlled by multiple parties. A multi-party collaborative governance approach should be adopted to shape a sound data governance ecosystem as well as to ensure the security of data in its lifecycle. The active role of governmental departments, technical communities, enterprises, industry organizations and individuals should be recognized and fully played. l Core principle III: Enhance international cooperation on data 
 
and mutual trust on data security Key commitments: (1) Relevant entities should promote the establishment of a international mechanism and platform to seek the “greatest common divisor” among different data rules. International organizations and platforms such as the UN Internet Governance Forum, the World Internet Conference (WIC) should be widely supported to play a constructive role in rules formation. Think tanks and research institutions should strengthen the analysis and research on global data rules. (2) All relevant entities should further enhance mutual trust on data security and maintain a fair business environment in digital economy. 