 
 
 ABRINT - BRAZILIAN  ASSOCIATION OF INTERNET AND TELECOMMUNICATIO NS 
SERVICE PROVIDER S 
CONTRIBUTION FOR GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
 
ABOUT ABRINT:  
 
ABRINT - Brazilian Association of Internet and Telecommunications Providers is a non -profit civil 
association whose social objective is to represent Regional Internet Service  Providers. Our 
Association currently has more than 1 ,500 members, spread througho ut the national territory, 
establishing itself as the largest representative association in Brazil of ISPs. 
 
Our intense dialogue with the regulator favored the understanding of the particularities of the 
regional ISPs market and the formulation of an asym metrical regulatory policy  in order to achieve 
meaningful connectivity .  
 
This asymmetrical regulatory policy greatly advanced Brazil’s broadband connectivity goals by 
positioning Brazil’s 20,000+ ISPs to provision more reliable fixed connections. This is a unique 
case: ISPs leads in grow th and market share, providing Internet connectivity for more than 50% 
of the more than  45 million fixed access points, which are mostly enabled via fiber to the home 
(FTTH).  
 
ABRINT strongly welcomes the initiative of the United Nations and the Secretary General to 
propose a Global Digital Compact, as a key high -level track of the Summit of the Future, which 
recognizes  the vital role which digital technology and the internet pl ays in the economy and 
society of the future.  The importance of the involvement of the full multistakeholder community 
throughout the entire Global Digital Compact process is highl y appreciated as well.  
 
The Global Digital Compact must be anchored in respect for human rights and serve as a roadmap 
for a human -centric, global digital transformation. It should be ambitious and express a clear 
vision that provides a framework for the increasing activity acros s the UN family, respecting all 
mandates, particularly the ITU, UNESCO, UNIDO and the IGF , and be anchored in robust support 
for Human Rights. We expect the Global Digital Compact to support an internet that is open, 
stable, free, inclusive, global, intero perable, reliable, secure and sustainable.  
 
For questions related to this contribution, please contact:  
liderconselho@abrint.com.br  
presidente@abrint.com.br  
 
 
 Abrint | Home  
Connect all people to the internet, including all schools   
Core principles:  
 
The analysis of themes by Abrint involves an understanding of the post -regulatory State Theory, 
the functioning of the internet, and the need to preserve the rights of information, expression, 
and thought.  
 
The post -regulatory State Theory emerged as a response to the weaknesses of the state 
regulation model based on command and control. This approach argues that the State should 
adopt a more flexible and adaptable postu re, using market mechanisms, self -regulation, and co -
regulation to deal with the complexities and challenges of regulating economic activities in the 
digital age.  
 
When we correlate the thoughts of Jacques Chevallier, Colin Scott, and Brownsword, the State  
qualifies for the mission of an "empowerer," providing citizens and companies with information 
and tools so they can make conscious and responsible choices. In this perspective, regulation 
should be seen as a way to achieve trust in the online environment  and increase transparency 
and accountability of economic agents.  
 
The post -regulatory State does not mean the absence of regulation or minimal State, but rather 
a change in the way regulation is conceived and applied. Some principles such as prudence, 
legitimacy, efficiency, and connection should guide this regulatory work.  
 
Prudence seeks to ensure that the regulation of new technologies is cautious and evidence -based, 
and legitimacy involves the democratic and socially accepted composition o f its rules. Efficiency 
refers to solutions that are effective in protecting fundamental rights and public safety, without 
detriment  to market innovation.  
 
Finally, we have the principle of connection, which refers to the idea that the regulation of new 
technologies should be connected to other areas of law and society, not being dissociated from 
consumer law, personal data protection, and competition defense.  
 
The Global Digital Compact should be able to highlight principles ,recommendations and 
actions in accordance with prudence, legitimacy , efficiency and connection, as mentioned  
and also with article 19 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  
 
The Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states that "everyone 
shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, recei ve and 
 
 
 impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, 
in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice". Furthermore, the article states that 
the exercise of this right carries special duties and responsibilities . Therefore  it may  be subject to 
certain restrictions, which , however, should  be only such that are provided by law and are 
necessary for respect of the rights or reputations of others, or for the protection of national 
security or of public order, or of public health or morals.  
 
On the other hand, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in its Article 19, affirms that 
"everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expressio n; this right includes freedom to hold 
opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any 
media and regardless of frontiers". The declaration also highlights that the freedom of expression 
should be guaranteed w ithout interference and that everyone has the right to freedom of 
thought, conscience and religion.  
 
Global Digital Compact must  recognize the importance of freedom of expression as a 
fundamental right that must be protected and respected. Freedom of expression is essential for 
the functioning of a democratic society, allowing people to express their opinions, ideas, and 
concerns, as well as enabling public debate and scrutiny of governments and institutions.  
 
Some 2.7 billion people in the world lack access to the Internet  - Facts and Figures 2022 (itu.int)  
- the majority of whom are women and girls in low - and middle -income countries. Furthermore, 
two thirds of the world’s school -age children – or 1.3 billion children aged 3 to 17 years old – do 
not have an Internet connection in their homes. This is furthe r complicated when we examine the 
nuances of the global digital divide  such as the gaps between urban and rural access and a further 
divide between men and women users, with men being more connected predominantly in poorer 
countries.  
 
Delivering universal  meaningful connectivity requires effective action on all these layers of the ICT 
ecosystem:  
 
(i) Internet access  
(ii) Affordability  
(iii) Digital skills and education  
(iv) Relevant content and services  
(v) Online safety  
 
We must have p ublic policies and regulations able to  promote the value of the entire 
communications and digital services ecosystem as well as  regulatory p olicies that can  promote 
competition, being technology -neutral, and supportive of innovative business models . Also, t o 
promote the needed universal access to technology and meaningful connectivity, the private 
sector's role should be acknowledged, and a comprehensive strategy involving various 
stakeholders should be developed. This strategy should aim to improve digital capabilities, 
 
 
 increas e funding for deployment of networks in remote areas, data collection, and develop 
regional and national programs that bridge the digital divide. Collaboration among relevant UN 
agencies and intergovernmental organizations should be encouraged to ensure lo cal context and 
wisdom are taken into account. Ultimately, the goal is to ensure that no one is left behind in the 
digital world.  
 
Connect all people to the internet, including all schools   
Key comm itments : 
 
ABRINT works with the objective of fostering meaningful connectivity in Brazil and share good 
practices and regulatory policies able to achieve this in other Latin America countries.  By rallying 
different stakeholders to bring the meaningful connectivity  agenda to the forefront of digital 
inclusion dialogues and policy -making processes, we aim to fast -track this goa l, sup porting 
decision process , helping ISPs all over the Brazilian ter ritory  and elaborating  research and analysis 
providing the needed evidence to support policy change . 
 
Also, in the context of neo -constitutional vision, access to high -speed internet has been 
recognized as a basic right, similar to the right to access clean water and electricity. As such, it is 
incumbent upon governments to ensure that all citizens have access to affordable and high -
quality internet services. This includes working with ISPs to ensure that they are providing services 
that meet the needs of their communities and that they are doing so in a way that is equitable 
and inclusive.  
To achieve  rapid and efficient action to clo se the connectivity gap, regulators should:  
 
1. Facilitate investment across the entire digital value chain ;  
2. Effectively manage use of spectrum , also allocating band for unlicensed  use (such as 6  
GHz);  
3. Ground policies in evidence and data ;  
4. Support asymmetric regulations in order to balance competition;  
5. Guarantee last mile connections and the deployment of regional and community 
networks;  
6. Facilitate  infrastructure sharing mechanisms  and new approaches to financing broadband 
networks ; 
7. Drive capacity building strategies  to achieve digital transformation and gain all economic 
externalities . 
 
Avoid internet fragmentation   
Core principles : 
 
 
 Initiatives that try to conform and force this virtual space into a national legal system can 
potentially result in its fragmentation process.   
 
In accordance with Drake W. Cerf V. Kleinwächter W. 2016. (“Future of the Internet Initiative White 
Paper, Internet Fragmentation: An Overview”. World Economic Forum. January. p.3 -4), the Open 
Internet provides a baseline approach from which fragmentation departs and against which it can 
be assessed. Particularly important are the notions of global reach with integrity; a unified, global 
and properly governed root and naming/numbering sy stem; interoperability; universal 
accessibility; the reusability of capabilities; and permissionless innovation. Its dimensions are: (I) 
Technical Fragmentation: conditions in the underlying infrastructure that impede the ability of 
systems to fully intero perate and exchange data packets and of the Internet to function 
consistently at all end points ; (ii) Governmental Fragmentation: Government policies and actions 
that constrain or prevent certain uses of the Internet to create, distribute, or access inform ation 
resources ; (iii) Commercial Fragmentation: Business practices that constrain or prevent certain 
uses of the Internet to create, distribute, or access information resources.  
 
The internet is flexible and has at its core the ability to adapt to different uses and needs. It is an 
open and decentralized network, with interoperable technical standards, where anyone can 
connect and share information and ideas. Here, no one should ask anyone else for permission. In  
practice, this means that freedom of expression on the Internet should not be restricted unless 
there is a clear, legal, and legitimate justification.  
 
The Global Digital Compact should reiterate all member states’ shared commitment to keeping 
the Interne t whole, open, interconnected and interoperable , recognizing the efforts of the Internet 
Governance Forum Policy Network on Internet Fragmentation to understand, map and bring 
recommendations to counter measures that might fragment the Internet at any of i ts dimensions.  
 
Avoid internet fragmentation   
Key commi tments : 
Our members understand the importance of an open internet and take their commitment to it 
seriously. They recognize that a fragmented internet and poor cybersecurity standards can lead 
to decreased trust in digital technologies, affecting individuals, busi nesses, governments, and 
society as a whole. To support this commitment, our members endorse the Internet Governance 
Forum Policy Network on Internet Fragmentation (IPNF), which aims to define internet 
fragmentation and its causes and effects, and establis h shared principles, recommendations, or 
codes of conduct to prevent fragmentation and preserve an open, interconnected, and 
interoperable internet. Our members strongly oppose internet shutdowns, including 
government -mandated shutdowns, as they undermine trust in the internet and digital economy, 
violate human rights, and harm the economic prospects of individuals, businesses, countries, and 
 
 
 regions. Any restrictions on internet access must be firmly grounded in international law and have 
a legitimate lega l basis.  
It is important  to ensure that the current model of the internet is developed, deployed, and 
managed within inclusive and multi -stakeholder institutions to prevent fragmentation. 
Additionally, ABRINT is committed to maintaining the multi -stakehold er ecosystem of internet 
governance and preventing geopolitical influence on the fundamentals of the internet. To achieve 
this, ABRINT always  participate in global and regional multi -stakeholder forums like the Internet 
Governance Forum to discuss and negotiate internet governance matters. Finally, we also  
promote a human -centric approach to the internet.  
 
Brasília, April 14 th, 2023.  
 
Mauricélio Oliveira - President  
Cristiane Sanches de Souza Corrêa  – Chairwoman le ader 
 