OBOR Legal Research Centre  
Policy Brief for the Global Digital Compact  
March 2023  
 
 
 1  
 
 
Addressing your  themes  on (1) Apply  human  rights  online  and (2) Promote  
regulation  of artificial  intelligence  
 
 
This brief suggests that our digital future should pay due regard to our right to work 
(provided in, e.g., Article 6 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights  ).1 
 
Digital developments (including AI) undeniably affect the right to work of many.  
Nevertheless , technological, digital and online developments should not unduly 
undermine the right.  
 
 
Core principles : 
 
 
1. Recogni zing that digital developments (including AI) af fect the right to work of 
many.  
 
2. Recogniz ing that the right to work should play a n unignorable  and pivotal 
role in the policy process  and balancing exercise on regulating AI  
 
3. The right to work needs to be upheld and emphasized as an obligation for 
Governments to achieve sustainable  socio -economic development . It is legally 
wrong to ignore the right to work when formulating policies.  
 
4. Art.16 ICESCR requires states parties to submit Periodic Reports  to the 
United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, “ on the 
measures which they have adopted , and also the progress made in 
achieving the observance of the rights”.  
                                                        
1 ASEAN Human Rights Declaration , Art.27: right to work  
Universal Declaration of Human Rights , Art.23: right to work  
European Social Charter , Art.1: Parties undertake to achieve a level of employment that is as high and 
as stable as possible  

OBOR Legal Research Centre  
Policy Brief for the Global Digital Compact  
March 2023  
 
 
 2  
5. Actions need to be taken to protect the right, and in case of impossibility, 
compensate for the loss of the right.  
 
 
Commitments:  
 
 
On the role of the United Nations  
 
 
1. The reviewing UN Committee on ESCR needs to pay extra and specific 
attention to what governments have done for the right to work . 
 
2. Update the UN General C omment No. 18 in light of  the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution.  In Martin Kwan’s work, it is explained that:  
 
‘U.N. General Comment No. 18 contains vague statements that could be 
understood t o suggest differently. This inconsistency may lea d to 
confusion and uncertainty.  
 
In particular, the U.N. Comment states that States have the obligation to 
“respect, protect and fulfil[l].” It problematically explains that the 
“obligation to protect requires States parties to take measures that 
prevent third parties from interfering with the enjoyment of the right to 
work.” Strictly speaking, automation amounts to interference, as it 
reduces access to work. Therefore, this statement essentially requires 
States “to take measures” to halt [digital developments and AI] . 
 
At the same time, c reating the threshold with the wording ‘interference’ 
is questionable, because it is too low a threshold. The word “interference” 
is of legal significance. Notably, the word “interference” is not used in the 
ICESCR itself, but it is used in the ICCPR to de note a different degree 
of protection. For example, article 17 of the ICCPR provides that there 
should be no “arbitrary or unlawful interference” with privacy. By contrast, 
article 19 provides that  everyone has “the right to hold opinions without 
interfere nce.”  The more  stringent wording of article 19 reflects that it is 
non-derogable.  The careful choice of words in the ICCPR evidences an 
intentional parallel because both the ICCPR and the ICESCR are based 
on the UDHR and they are adopted in the same Resolu tion. Hence, the 
U.N. Committee which drafted the U.N. General Comment No. 18 in 
OBOR Legal Research Centre  
Policy Brief for the Global Digital Compact  
March 2023  
 
 
 3 2006 presumably must be well -aware of the subtle meaning of the word 
“interference.”   
 
Applying this observation, the General Comment No. 18 has set a highly 
dubious threshold. It does not qualify the level of interference, such as 
“arbitrary interference.” If any interference should be prevented, it would 
mean that automation must be stoppe d, even if automation is done with 
the benign motive of benefiting the overall economy with improved 
efficiency. This cannot be right, because by analogy, if a highly capable 
person can do the work of four people alone and leave them unemployed 
in a hypoth etical economy with only five available jobs, the highly 
capable person is similarly “interfering” with the right to work of others. 
However, it would be illogical to say that the highly capable person 
should be prohibited because of the highly capable per son’s skill set. 
Apart from uncertainty, General Comment No. 18 has set an outmoded 
goal that has become increasingly less achievable. It expects full 
employment. However, the economic reality, or the ideal world created 
by automation, is moving towards el iminating the need for humans to 
work. ’2 
 
 
On the role of governments  
 
 
3. The governments cannot  take a laissez -faire approach  to technological 
development and its impact to our right to work. Art.6  requires governments to 
take steps to safeguard our right to work . 
 
4. In reparation to the loss of the right to work, governments need to (a) provide  
training and guidance  and (b) an adequate compensation fund for loss of 
employment . 
 
5. Explore  and plan for  the feasibility and future necessity of a Universal Basic 
Income  (UBI).  
 
6. Governments should take the lead to promote a new corporate social 
responsibility  that urge companies to pay attention to the impact to employment 
they generate from disruptive digital applications  
 
 
                                                        
2 Martin Kwan, “ Automation and the International Human Right to Work ” (2021) Emory International 
Law Review.  
OBOR Legal Research Centre  
Policy Brief for the Global Digital Compact  
March 2023  
 
 
 4 On the role of corporations  
 
 
7. Strong justifications  for imposing a  social duty on corporations to offer  solutions  
(e.g. providing training ) 
 
- Companies are the ones who deploy and benefit most from digital 
applications and AI.  
 
- The U.N. Guiding Principles for Business and Human Rights suggest 
companies help address human rights consequence.  
 
- Corporate social responsibility . 
 
 
 
OBOR Legal Research Centre  
 
Martin Kwan is a n independent policy consultant. His expertise lies in technology and human 
rights. He has been invited as a podcast speaker  for Cambridge University’s Centre of 
Governance and Human Rights : 
https://podcasts.apple.com/gb/podcast/artificial -intelligence -the-ultimate -threat -
to/id1178474117?i=1000554997222  
 
He is also a speaker at the 6th Regional Meeting on Human Rights Education: Human Rights 
and Emerging Technologies (organized by the ASEAN University Network and Mahidol 
University) : 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Z6eY0mWt7A&pp=ygUPbWFydGluIGt3YW4gUkFG  
 
He can be reached at martinkwan 22@gmail.com  
 