 
CAICT  Input to the Global Digital Compact  
 
1. CONNECT ALL PEOPLE TO THE INTERNET, INCLUDING ALL 
SCHOOLS  
a. Core Principles  
i. Take the promotion of digital infrastructure development and the achievement of 
universal and meaningful digital connectivity as the overarching principle of the 
Global Digital Compact, and ensure that all people have access to affordable digital 
connectivity and devices, necessary digital skills and literacy, a nd appropriate Internet 
applications and services . 
ii. Adhere to the sharing, inclusiveness and universality of digital technology  for all , 
and ensure that vulnerable groups such as the elderly , women , children, persons with 
disabilities, indigenous people, and poor people have equal rights to share digital 
technology.  
iii. Encourage the deployment and utilization of new technologies, and give full play 
to the role of digital technology in achieving the goals of The 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Develop ment by the United Nations, promoting the balanced regional 
development , and bridging the digital gap.  
iv. The provision of development assistance such as capacity building  should respect 
the cyber polic ies and regulations of each country, and be based on local cultures, 
languages and needs to ensure long -term sustainable development.  
b. Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
ITU and other related international organizations , governments, the private sector and 
other stakeholders shall jointly build a community of development in the digital age  
based on the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society and the Geneva Declaration of 
Principles , adopt more proactive, coordinated and inclusive policies, enhance 
international experience exchange and cooperation , share best practices, and work 
together to : 
i. Promote digital  infrastructure development and innovation through greater 
multilateral and multi  stakeholder cooperation  in an inclusive and equitable  
manner : 

 Encourage the in corporation  of universal connectivity into national strateg y to 
promote investment in digital infrastructure. Mobilize  and utilize multi -channel 
funds, such as national special plans and budgets, universal service funds, 
international aid and financing , to achieve  universal connectivity  based on  
reasonable development goals and evaluation period . 
 Invest in and deploy  technology solutions that are economical, flexible, 
environmentally friendly, quality -reliable , and introduce more 
development -friendly policies for frequency spectrum, sites, right of way, 
construction, and power supply , etc. , to reduce the cost of building, operating and 
maintaining digital infrastructure . 
 Encourag e to interconnect  submarine cable networks and satellite networks  
globally , and jointly  explore the cross -border interconnection of digital 
infrastructure such as the industrial Internet and blockchain.  
 Encourag e cooperation  on joint research on cross -border applications, 
implementation of international standards, verification of regulatory rules, 
construction of public services, incubation of innovative applications and 
cultivation of industrial ecology based on digital infrastructure, to  promote the  
innovation and  development of the global digita l economy . 
ii. Increase the supply of  affordable smart terminals and digital  applications 
through the following measures:  
 Reduce the production, circulation and transaction costs of entry -level smart  
terminals.  
 Encourage the development, distribution  and operation of apps suitable for 
entry -level smart terminals.  
iii. Ensure that digital applications and digital devices are accessible to 
vulnerable groups such as the elderly and the disabled , through the following 
targeted measures : 
 Provide policy guarantee for safe and equal a ccess to digital technology for 
vulnerable groups . 
 Collaboratively  promote the development of global unified technical standards 
and specifications for digital inclusion in areas such as mobile internet 
applications and smart terminal devices . 
 Encourage gl obal developers of digital technologies and applications to integrate 
the universal design concept into the whole product lifecycle , expand the scale of 
inclusive digital product supply, and explore replicable and sustainable business 
models . 
 Encourage innovation and application of digital technologies such as artificial 
intelligence and big data in digital inclusion.  
iv. Empower everyone  with  digital skills and literacy through the following 
measures:  
 Provide legal, regulatory or policy guarantee  to enhance digital skills and literacy . 
 Encourage the digital industry to carry out education and training on digital 
literacy and skills, and design targeted training content according to user 
characteristics that is easy for user to understand  and opera te. 
 Develop and provide online training platforms accessible to all, and conduct 
offline education and training activities in communities and elderly nursing homes 
at irregular intervals . 
v. Promote the use of digital technology to achieve  SDGs , including:  
 Actively track and evalua te the role of digital technolog ies in  the achievement of 
SDGs . 
  Promote experience sharing and cooperation related to the application of digital 
technology in achieving SDGs  such as poverty alleviation , quality education, 
decent work and economic growth, innovation and infrastructure, reduction of 
inequality, sustainable cities and communities . 
  Provide financial input, technical and policy training, personnel training, etc. for 
developing countries  to accelerate digital infrastru cture construction, and the 
application and popularization of digital technologies.  
2. DIGITAL PUBLIC GOODS  (DPGs)  
a. Core Principles  
i. Driven by digital innovation:  The core driving force of DPG s comes from digital 
innovation. DPGs should provide innovative digital solutions, promote continuous 
innovation, better meet social needs, provide  higher -quality social public services, and 
help achieve SDGs.  
ii. Accessible and usable to anyone: Based on t he non -rivalrous and non -excludable 
nature of public goods, DPGs should be operated and used in a way that allows 
unrestricted and equitable access by all.  
iii. Sustainability: DPGs should be stable throughout their life cycle, able to ensure 
long-term ope ration under normal use as well as foreseeable risks, able to respond to 
all kinds of emergency.  
iv. Scalability:  DPGs should be able to be deployed flexibly to accommodate 
growing, iterative and localized  needs.  
v. Harmlessness:  DPGs should be free of har m to all users. DPGs should be safe, 
adhere to international and local regulatory frameworks, protected data privacy and 
security, and prevent discrimination and bias. DPGs should not be exploited for 
illegitimate gains.  
vi. Interoperability:  DPGs should e nsure interoperability to the maximum extent. 
Through a unified standard framework, the processes and mechanisms of all aspects 
of the DPGs should be standardized to achieve reciprocal sharing among stakeholders.  
vii. Inclusiveness:  The entire life cycle o f DPGs should ensure the fair and 
transparent participation of all stakeholders, with particular attention paid to the 
development needs of low - and middle -income countries as well as the demands of 
vulnerable and marginalized groups. It should adopt an in clusive design concept to 
ensure that the public can gain benefit. It should promote inclusive digital 
transformation to bridge the global digital divide.  
b. Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
i. Promote the common understanding of DPG s 
Encourage in -depth exchanges and discussions on the definition and scope of DPG s, 
to seek common ground , promote common understanding, enhance the inclusiveness 
and representativeness of the concept of DPGs , and promote DPG s to maximize 
people’s well-being.  
ii. Cultivate a good innovation ecology  
 Promote multidisciplinary cross -fertilization  and the exchange and sharing of 
science, technology, and data, and bring together all stakeholders to promote 
innovation.  
 Foster the initiation of more open -source projects and prosper more open -source 
communities, to enhance the contribution of DPGs . 
 Set up an expert evaluation committee in the DPGA with the support of the UN,  to 
analyze and advise on the feasibility of DPGs.  
 Encourage and support capaci ty building in implementation countries , to empower 
localized applications and innovation.  
iii. Maintain the public good attributes of DPGs  
 Open access to data and resources as much as possible while abiding by the FAIR 
principle and ensuring digital security and privacy.  
 The functions of DPG s should be convenient and  operator -friendly.  
iv. Guarantee the stability of DPGs  
 Develop an ar chiving mechanism, prepare records and timely update source code, 
user instructions, functional requirements and other documents.  
 Establish a risk warning mechanism and plans , to ensure regular maintenance of 
projects and data.  
v. Ensure the safeness and  harmlessness of DPGs  
 All projects should demonstrate before implement ation  that measures have been 
taken to ensure that they are foreseeable, preventable and harm less. 
  Guarantee  security and privacy of material s (information, data, etc.) received in 
project s, identify source s, content and type s of materials,  and take steps to prevent 
adverse effects wh ile collecting, storing and distributing them . 
 Comply with agreements and licenses  permitted by international and  local laws  
and regulations,  and respect different cultural environments.  
vi. Provide a conducive international development environment  
 Explore the establish ment of  a governance mechanism under the UN framework 
to regulate and govern the entire life cycle of DPGs, and ensur e stakeholders’  
participation.  
 The participation of all stakeholders and consistency of stakeholders ’ needs and 
objectives should be ensured while  developing DPGs.  
 Encourage stakeholders to participate  in setting up standardization and assessment 
mechanisms for DPGs, facilitate the participation of developing countries in 
relevant works.  
 UN should facilitate collaboration among stakeholders and  support countries in 
establish their own repositories to identify, document and share DPG projects, 
organizations and best practices, and link them with the DPG Registry.  
 