 
    
 
Input to the Consultations on the Global Digital Compact  
Prepared by  the Secretariat  of the Commission on Science and Technology for Development (CSTD)1 
 
A. Context setting (why the GDC is important and what needs to be achieved)  
Why GDC is important?  
Over recent years fast developments in the digital space, the pandemic, economic uncertainty, and 
conflict, both real -world and digital  have significantly altered the context in which the global community 
must address the challenge of achieving digital development  through digital cooperation.  At the same 
time, discussions at the UN Commission on Science and Technology for Development ( CSTD ) illustrate that 
considerations about the lack of truly universal  inclusion in the di gital economy , the need to fully integrate 
the digital dimension into actions to address poverty, gender equality, and climate change , and grave 
concerns about cybersecurity remain as valid as ever.  
Take the digital divide. Although 63% of the world’s pop ulation is using the Internet , least developed 
countries still only count 27% of their populations as internet users2. In its annual review of the p rogress 
made in the implementation of and follow -up to the outcomes of the World Summit of the Information 
Society at the regional and international levels , the CSTD has noted  that the persistent connectivity divide 
can lead to a serious development divide, stalling the progress to achieve the 2030 Agenda for sustainable 
development.  
Conflicts in which digital technology plays an increasingly central role have become one of the most salient 
effects of digitalization on society and politics globally. Digital technology is becoming increasingly 
weaponized in sophisticated ways. From cyberattacks that disru pt infrastructure and services to the theft 
of sensitive information and the destabilizing potential of deep fakes and fake news, information 
technologies are increasingly often among the major causes and means of conflict. Countries lacking the 
cybersecur ity infrastructure to protect themselves from these threats are liable to suffer 
disproportionately, amplifying global power imbalances.  
The multidimensional impact of digital data on all aspects of societies and economies continues to 
necessitate global c onversations around regulation and governance. Areas of concern are wide -ranging 
and include the geographical concentration of digital innovation and data management, problems of 
cross -border jurisdiction, competition policy, consumer rights, and content m oderation.  
The regulatory challenges created by those questions are complex, particularly where the need for 
international enforcement interacts with differences in national laws and norms. International forums are 
increasingly concerned with such issues. For example , a growing number of initiatives aim to address the 
 
1 Contact: Ms. Liping Zhang, Chief, Science Technology and Innovation for Development Section, Technology, 
Innovation, Knowledge Development Branch, Division of Technology and Logistics, UNCTAD (stdev@unctad.org).  
2 https://datahub.itu.int/data/?c=&i=11624& e= 
ethical dimensions of emerging technologies such as machine learning and artificial intelligence, raising 
the question of the risk of fragmentation in the treatment of these matters.  
None of t hese challenges can be tackled successfully without digital cooperation.  The ongoing process of 
consultations on the Global Digital Compact should outline shared principles for an open, free, and secure 
digital future for all, which could become k ey compon ents of deliberations at the Summit of the Future in 
2024.  
What needs to be achieved?  
A number of elements can  be identified based on the work undertaken in the CSTD as part of its review 
and follow up to the implementation of the outcomes of the World Su mmit on the Information Society 
(WSIS):  
• Digital cooperation  should be  recognized as central to the GDC . The multidimensional impact of 
digital ization  on all aspects of societies and economies continues to necessitate global 
conversations around regulation and governance. Areas of concern are wide -ranging and include 
the geographical concentration of digital innovation and data management, problems of c ross-
border jurisdiction, competition policy, consumer rights, and content moderation. The regulatory 
challenges created by those questions are complex, particularly where the need for international 
enforcement interacts with differences in national laws a nd norms. International forums are 
increasingly concerned with such issues. For example, a growing number of initiatives aim to 
address the ethical dimensions of emerging technologies such as machine learning and artificial 
intelligence, raising the questi on of the risk of fragmentation in the treatment of these matters.  
 
• The GDC should focus beyond solutions -oriented work to address systemic issues.  Recognizing 
that GDC and WSIS are distinctive processes, the GDC could cover areas that WSIS was not 
designe d to address. While the WSIS vision remains strongly relevant in seeking to achieve a 
people -centred, inclusive and development -oriented Information Society, it was impossible to 
foresee and plan for the extent and manner in which digitalization has occurr ed. Given the 
constantly changing and increasingly complex digital economy and society,  the GDC should 
prioritise the  creation of a  long -term  platform and framework for accountable and inclusive 
global digital governance.  
 
• Mechanism s for all stakeholders to keep abreast of the progress made in the implementation 
of digital cooperation should avoid complexity and duplication.  Member States and other 
stakeholders, particularly those from developing countries , often face challenges to keep tr ack of 
developments in international processes in the digital sphere.  A central review mechanism that, 
similar to that for the WSIS, seeks to be focal point for digital development issues is crucially 
important to ensure that the challenges and opportuniti es presented by the constantly changing 
digital context are appropriately addressed at the international level. The CSTD, with its 
longstanding experience and the stock of knowledge it has accumulated in its work on the WSIS 
outcomes, enjoys unique advanta ges to contribute valuably to the success of the GDC  in this 
regard .   
 
• Finally, t he GDC process must recognize that trust is the foundation for the digital economy  and 
society  and must be built through various measures, including more robust cybersecurity, data 
privacy laws, consumer protection, and transparency measures.  It should high light the need for 
digital experiences that respect human rights and prevent discrimination, and which ensure that 
individuals can have control over their data.  
 
 
B. Sources of knowledge (what is the basis for our inputs – have we involved any consultations with our 
member states and other stakeholders)  
These inputs of the CSTD have been based on  the discussions among member States and other 
stakeholders engaged in the CSTD work on digital technologies and the WSIS follow up, as well as the  
annual report s of the Secretary -General on progress made in the implementation of and follow -up to the 
outcomes of the WSIS at the regional and international level , which incorporate contributions from over 
30 international organizations, regional commissions and non -governmental entities .3 The annual 
Secretary -General’s report s on this matter have  been prepared in response to Economic and Social 
Council resolution 2006/46, which requested the Secretary -General of the United Nations to inform the 
CSTD about implementing  the W SIS outcomes.  
The Report of the Secretary -General on WSIS is presented in the annual session of the Commission on 
Science and Technology for Development (CSTD) . It forms the  basis of discussion with member States and 
other stakeholders to identify emerging and future opportunities and challenges faced by the 
information society, including the socio -economic consequences arising from acceleration of the 
changes caused by digitalization.  At the 26th annual session of the CSTD  held on 27 to 31 March , 
member States and other stakeholders discussed the GDC process and shared thoughts about the 
path it should take.  
C. Wha t we would like member States to do moving forward  
Retain a people -centric approach, building on the WSIS vision and principles:  
The objective of the World Summit from its inception has been to move towards a “people -centered, 
inclusive and development -oriented Information Society.” Its overarching mission was to ensure that the 
benefits of ICTs, networks, and services would be available to all and that these technologies would 
 
3 For instance , in the latest report,  inputs are provided by the following  entities: Association for Progressive 
Communications (APC); Council of Europe; Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP); 
Economic and Social Commission for  Western Asia (ESCWA); Economic Commission for Africa (ECA); Economic 
Commission for Europe (ECE); Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC); End Child 
Prostitution in Asian Tourism International; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); Global 
System for Mobile Communications Association (GSMA); International Federation of Library Associations and 
Institutions (IFLA); Internet Society (ISOC); International Telecommunication Union (ITU); International Trade Centre ; 
Office of the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology; Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development 
(OECD); UNCTAD; United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF); United Nations Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs (DESA); United Nations Develop ment Programme (UNDP); United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO); United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women); 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP); United Nations Industrial Deve lopment Organization; United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East; 
Universal Postal Union; World Bank; World Food Programme; World Health Organization (WHO); World Intellectual 
Property Organization; World Meteorological Organization; World Trade Organization.  
contribute to gains in social and economic welfare, including the achievement of first the MDGs and now 
the SDGs.  
It is crucial to m aintain the internation al community’s commitment to this objective and orient the Global 
Digital Compact around it. The development, promotion, implementation, and governance of digital 
technologies must take a “people -first” approach. They must focus on ensuring that technologi es’ benefits 
are inclusive, notably by first closing the digital divide and making technologies accessible to all. Access 
does not just mean availability and affordability; it also means awareness of the existence of the 
technology, linguistic and disabili ty accessibility, and ability in terms of user skills.  
The WSIS vision  could provide the foundations of the GDC  process  and vision. T he WSIS’s multi -
stakeholder and global approach  should also be maintained in the GDC’s  own working methods . 
Ensure the GDC adds coherence, not incoherence, in the multilateral digital ecosystem:  
In formulating the GDC, member States must consider how it interacts with the pre -existing multilateral 
digital/ICT landscape to ensure it does not simply add another layer of comp lexity and overlap with other 
actors in the area, including WSIS. If the outcome of the GDC involves a larger scale overhaul of existing 
institutions and bodies, it is crucial that member States capitalise on the work that has been done by these 
and learns  from their experiences. The WSIS multistakeholder approach in particular is one that the GDC 
should draw lessons from.  
Existing institutions and infrastructure should be made use of where appropriate. The CSTD for instance, 
as the focal point in the UN sy stem on STI for development which  has long considered the policy issues 
raised by rapid technological changes  and are strongly driven by the evolution of digital technologies , has 
extensive knowledge and expertise to share and build on . It may also serve a s a forum for member States 
and other stakeholders to monitor progress in the GDC’s implementation, similar to the role it has played 
for the WSIS follow up.  
Concerns about digital divides reflected in WSIS outcome documents remain important. The internati onal 
community should c ontinue to  pay particular attention to the risk that unequal access to digital 
technology will exacerbate divides in access to other developmental goods, perpetuating social and 
economic disparities.  
Given the longstanding work of WSIS on the digital question and the many lessons that have been learned 
across two decades, it is strongly recommended that the experience gained in the WSIS process and 
outcomes,  and the relevant findings and expertise are fully considered and built on as the Global Digital 
Compact  is shaped .  
Supporting documents  
ECOSOC, 2021 Session, Report of the Secretary -General: Progress made in the implementation of and 
follow -up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and 
international levels (A/78/62 -E/2023/49), available at: https://unctad.org/system/files/official -
document/a76d64_en.pdf  
 
ECOSOC, 2022 Session, Report of the Secretary -General: Progress made in the implementation of and 
follow -up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and 
international levels (A/78/62 -E/2023/49), available at: https://u nctad.org/system/files/official -
document/a77d62_en.pdf  
 
ECOSOC, 202 3 Session, Report of the Secretary -General: Progress made in the implementation of and 
follow -up to the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society at the regional and 
international levels (A/78/62 -E/2023/49), available at: https://unctad.org/system/files/official -
document/a78d62_en.pdf  
 
CSTD, 21st Session, 2018: Report of the Chair of the Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation  
(E/CN.16/2018/CRP.3 ), available at:  
https://unctad.org/system/files/official -document/ecn162018crp3_en.pdf   
 
Working Group on Enhanced Cooperation on Public Policy Issues Pertaining to the Internet (2016 -
2018) at: https://unctad.org/topic/commission -on-science -and-technology -for-
development/wgec -2016 -2018  
 
  