 
 
IFLA  RESPONSE  TO THE  GLOBAL  DIGITAL  COMPACT  CONSULTATION  
  
CONNECT  ALL  PEOPLE  TO THE  INTERNET,  INCLUDING  ALL  SCHOOLS  
 
What Principles Should Apply  
 
1) We must see universal internet connectivity as part of the universal human 
right of access to information : above all, the internet is a means of accessing 
information, a task that libraries have throughout their existence sought to 
deliver on.  Through doi ng this, we ‘import’ the same logic as applies to the 
Universal Declaration, i.e. that everyone’s needs need to be met before we can 
declare success or victory. Drawing this parallel is also helpful in allowing us to 
make connections between longstanding d ebates around information access 
and ethics and current discussions around connectivity and how it is used.  
2) School  and education connectivity must include good quality (school) library 
connectivity : school librarians play a crucial role in supporting teac hers, as well 
as often carrying out teaching work themselves. They are a key source of 
materials for teachers, offer a space for homework and expanding learners’ 
horizons, and can be an internet  access point of last resort for children who lack 
the connect ivity, devices, or space to get online at home. Furthermore, by 
developing children’s information literacy, school libraries are arguably an 
increasingly essential part of the education infrastructure.   
3) School connectivity must include connectivity for pu blic and community 
libraries : public and community libraries play an essential complementary role 
to schools and other education institutions  in supporting education, and one 
that is enhanced by the access to materials and communication that the 
internet o ffers. From supporting literacy and school readiness at the youngest 
age, to complementing schools and education in stitutions during formal 
education and then acting as a venu e for, or portal to lifelong learning 
opportunities subsequently.  
4) Connectivity is  only one piece of the picture – it needs to be accompanied by 
investment in skills and support : we cannot only help people to get online, but 
have to offer a ‘wrap -around’ set of support in order to help them make the 
most of the internet, as well as to s tay safe online. This implies ensuring not 
just a one -off investment in physical connectivity, but also investment in people 
and institutions which can deliver over time. It does also imply a responsibility 
on individuals and others providing training and support to adapt and build 
around the needs of individuals, rather than third party interests.  
5) We need to provide public internet access options, including through opening 
school libraries up for community use : it is clear that public internet access is 

Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
2 
 not just a stepping stone towards ‘private’ access, but rather has an ongoing 
value as a complementary means of connectivity. In other words, universal or 
near -universal home connectivity does not remove the need for public access – 
people use each for diff erent purposes, and with the internet and services in 
continuous evolution, there will always be the need for a place to adapt and 
learn.   
6) We need to recognise and support the value of community connectivity: the 
internet, despite the many advantages it b rings, can risk being a factor in 
leading to a greater compartmentalisation of society, with different individual 
experiences. As such, we need to pay attention to the value of connecting as a 
community, for example through initiatives such as community ne tworks, or 
mixed in -person and online activities that realise the potential of the internet to 
support not just individual, but community development.  
7) We should treat the internet as a utility, along the same lines as water and 
electricity, without forcin g everyone to connect : the library field echoed the 
point made by many others that we need to confirm the frequently made 
assertion that internet access should be seen as a basic universal service. At the 
same time, a number of recipients underlined that n o-one should be forced to 
connect, given the concerns that many have about the internet and the digital 
world.   
8) We should consider participation in the information society as a right : such an 
approach covers a wide range of internet governance issues, but  goes to the 
heart of what we should be trying to do through the Global Digital Compact. 
Just as it is not possible to shut someone away from society, except in 
exceptional cases, it should not be possible to leave them in a situation of 
being unable to be nefit from the possibilities that the information society 
brings.  
9) We should encourage methods for cyber safety : library access points should 
not be used cybercrime activities and libraries can provide training in 
acceptable use and cyber safety in accessi ng internet resources.  
 
What Actions Should Governments Take?  
 
1) Ensure that access to information and participation in the information society 
is part of any national bill of rights or constitution : while this access is part of 
the Universal Declaration, it would send an important signal to citizens to 
include access t o information in constitutions or other basic laws.  
2) Commit to connecting all of their own schools and libraries, and once this is 
done, work to ensure continuous improvements in connectivity and available 
hardware : governments should establish and publish roadmaps to achieving 
these goals, using a standard t emplate that best allows for comparison and 
mutual learning.  
3) Establish a suitable and dynamic definition of broadband connectivity: this 
should reflect the quality of connectivity needed to make full use of the internet, 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
3 
 and evolve over time to reflect ne w uses. A set of steps within this may be 
desirable in order not to ignore the value of even basic connectivity vis -à-vis 
none at all. Such a definition should also include access to connectivity in 
different forms, such as libraries, given that these comp lement home 
connectivity, and can offer critical resilience in times of crisis (see below).  
4) Disaggregate connectivity data in order to allow for meaningful policy 
responses:  there needs to be effective testing of the quality of connectivity. in 
particular,  it is important to be able to understand the situation facing people in 
remote areas, as well as people and communities at risk of marginalisation. 
This data should be published regularly, in a timely fashion, and publicly in 
order to allow for third part y oversight.  
5) Launch a  renewed drive on literacy and integrat e information literacy into 
curricula : basic literacy skills remain a determining factor in being able to 
realise the full potential of connectivity, despite the exciting possibilities 
available t o use the internet to support oral traditions and help people with low 
skills. Achieving universal literacy, including for adults, must receive a renewed 
focus.  
6) Make meaningful universal connectivity a core pillar of development 
assistance programmes : tho se countries which are active in supporting 
development elsewhere in the world should look to support connectivity as a 
key precondition for the achievement of other goals, not least around 
education, health and beyond. Ideally, the connection between conn ectivity and 
the effectiveness of other policy agendas should be taken into account, and 
tools such as UNESCO’s Internet Universality Indicators applied to assess 
where investment may be needed.  
7) Support strong and connected library fields : As highlighted,  libraries are a key 
part of the broader connectivity infrastructure, not only offering the only or a 
complementary venue for getting online, but also supporting effectiveness by 
providing help and resources which make connectivity meaningful. This can be 
about updating existing locations, providing mobile services, adding or 
strengthening library services in schools and other education institutions, or 
building new locations and ensuring they have the resources to operate over 
time, with trained and dedica ted staff.  
8) Provide and protect public access options in times of disaster or crisis: Recent 
disasters have demonstrated the degree to which people rely on libraries when 
things turn bad, as a shelter, source of electricity, and place to access the 
interne t. With disasters likely only to get more common in coming years, public 
access options which can act as a secondary connectivity network are essential.   
9) Maximise the value and attractiveness of connectivity by supporting the 
creation of relevant services and content: once people are connected, they 
should be able to do things online, such as engage with government services 
or access public information. A parallel key issue is to invest in making content 
available in different languages. Crucially, we must promote openness in this – 
there is no point developing a variety of content if it is subsequently reserved 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
4 
 only for the wealthiest thanks to the over -application of intellectual property 
rights. Furthermore, there needs to be investment in providing acces sible 
content for people with disabilities. This will be aided by an expansive 
implementation of the Marrakesh Treaty.   
10) Always ensure that there are fallback options for the unconnected: with the 
above all being said, we must respect the right of people n ot to be online if they 
wish, as well as those who are not capa ble of digital only . This should not lead 
to exclusion from society however – ‘Digital only’ can be a risky way forwards.  
11) Legislate to protect net neutrality:  this remains a key determinant of  the value 
of connectivity with the risk being that violations of net neutrality, including 
through zero -rating, lead to a skewed experience of the internet, driven by 
private rather than public interests. The internet should be regulated like a 
utility.  
12) Regulate to enable experimentation and alternative means of connectivity : 
governments should not be protecting the monopoly or oligopoly positions of 
legacy internet providers, not only in situations where they are failing to 
deliver, but also where innova tion could deliver better experiences. Newer 
forms of connectivity – community networks, TV white space, and low -earth 
orbit satellites should be enabled to demonstrate their potential to bring people 
online.  
13) Build trust in the internet : the internet is t oo vital a resource for it to be 
desirable that lazy criticisms, fear -mongering, and over -simplification shake 
people’s confidence in it. At the same time, there clearly are challenges to trust 
that need to be addressed, including anti -competitive behaviou rs, a sense of a 
lack of transparency, and worry about loss of privacy or individual choice. 
Governments should maintain a constructive attitude towards the internet, in 
order to avoid undermining people’s incentives to connect, while taking 
proportionate actions to address challenges.   
 
 
What Actions Should Libraries Take?  
 
1) Embrace their role in meaningful connectivity : supporting meaningful use of 
the internet should become a key mission of libraries, as already set out in the 
IFLA -UNESCO Public Library Manifesto. This should be accompanied by 
planning and action to realise this role, for example through delivering ICT  
training and digital literacy support, as well as provision of content . Clearly, 
there should be an ongoing focus on basic literacy as a gateway to these other 
forms of literacy. Achieving this may require hiring or training skilled staff in 
order to deli ver. 
2) Coordinate the field through national libraries or national library agencies : 
libraries should see supporting meaningful connectivity as a systemic mission. 
In order to meet this, it will be valuable to build coordination and collective 
action and ref lection on priorities and challenges. Plans and policy documents 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
5 
 should be developed both to guide this, and to provide transparency to others, 
including potential partners.  
3) Advocate for connectivity: given their focus on access to information, libraries 
should join in national efforts, both governmental and non -governmental to act 
in favour of connectivity. This can also be an opportunity to set out how public 
access through libraries is a vital part of any universal connectivity strategy. 
Libraries and th eir associations/agencies can strengthen advocacy by gathering 
and publishing data about connectivity in libraries and use (without violating 
privacy).   
4) Draw on their own understanding of local information needs in order to deliver 
the most effective supp ort: libraries should be responsive in the support they 
offer to members of the community, and as far as possible tailor their offer to 
these, rather than trying to offer one -size-fits-all solutions. The same applies to 
the spaces and equipment that they offer,  which should be as adaptable as 
possible.  
5) Libraries should offer free WiFi and other access to users, with as few 
restrictions as possible : no-one should be unable to connect to the internet due 
to a lack of resources. Filtering obligations should be kep t to a minimum. 
Where they are unavoidable, they should be applied in a transparent manner, 
and as predictably and objectively as possible.  
 
 
AVOID  INTERNET  FRAGMENTATION  
 
What Principles Should Apply?  
  
1) The internet by its nature is borderless: it is alw ays worth reiterating this point, 
in the light of efforts to create specific national internets. Its lack of borders is 
central not just to its operation, but also to its value to people.  
2) The governance of the internet should be multistakeholder : the inte rnet does 
not lend itself to being led by national governments alone, and it is far more 
efficient and effective for the interests and needs of stakeholders to be heard 
directly rather than channelled through others. Such an approach should 
nonetheless be organised in a way to promote maximum participation.  
3) Decisions cannot only be national/regional, without consideration of wider 
repercussions: as far as possible, internet governance decisions should not be 
taken in isolation. This not only creates issues  of disconnect between 
jurisdictions, but also effectively leads to the rules implemented by larger 
economies or blocs being imposed on others. The best response to this is close 
and ongoing collaboration, involving stakeholders.   
4) Access to information is  a cross -border right : it must be made clear that the 
right of access to information spreads across borders, and so blockages (both 
explicit, and those created by other policies, such as copyright) at frontiers 
should be avoided, and subject to strict cond itions of necessity and 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
6 
 proportionality. Blanket restrictions should be rejected by default, while the 
fragmentary effects of policies such as those on data protection should be 
explored carefully.   
 
What Actions Should Governments Take?  
 
1) Write into agreements that the internet is indivisible and borderless : a key part 
of the value of the internet is the possibility it creates to share with people 
around the world. Restrictions at borders serve to undermine this, and need to 
be well justifi ed or otherwise condemned.   
2) Adopt and uphold the Manila Principles on intermediary liability : the ability of 
intermediaries to bring people together remains vital for the work of libraries 
and the potential of the internet to fulfil its potential. Regulat ion of them should 
stick to the principle of necessity and proportionality, and not serve to oblige 
them to create borders between users in different countries (or at least 
registered there)  
3) Develop mechanisms for learning and discussion globally : these p roposals 
imply a strong degree of policy coordination between countries. Achieving this 
will require structures that facilitate this work between authorities, in order to 
build understanding and look for the least disruptive responses to concerns 
raised in  terms of cross -border information flows.  
4) Develop international instruments that make clear that copyright exceptions 
should be enjoyed across borders : highly valuable cross -border activities such 
as education and research can be made uncertain or impossib le through the 
over -application of copyright protections, leading to internet fragmentation. 
This needs to be addressed through action at the World Intellectual Property 
Organization.    
 
What Actions Should Libraries Take?  
 
1) Make the case for openness : in order to support cross -border access to 
information, libraries should be active in building understanding of the 
contribution this makes to the fulfilment of their missions, and advocate in this 
sense. They can, in particular, highlight the impacts of not  being able to work 
across borders, in order to help policy makers understand the costs of inaction.  
 
 
PROTECT  DATA  
 
What Principles Should Apply   
 
1) Attacks on privacy have a significant chilling effect – this must be recognised : 
taking away people’s privacy can have a major impact on the way they take 
decisions. Particularly insidious can be the likelihood of self -censorship or 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
7 
 actions intended to avo id any risk, going well beyond what is and isn’t allowed 
under the law, and without possibility to monitor or understand what is going 
on.   
2) Cybersecurity is there to protect people, not just infrastructure : as set out in 
IFLA’s own statement on cybersecur ity, the primary goal of this must be to 
ensure that personal data and other interests are well protected. As such, 
cybersecurity must be designed around people, as well as being available to 
them.   
3) Surveillance requires oversight and transparency : the right to a private life is a 
fundamental right, and so any infringement of this must be strongly and strictly 
justified. It is nonetheless clear that meaningful use of data can be a driver of 
progress, and so a balance must be found. For example, it should be made 
clear when data is being collected, in order to allow individuals to make 
informed and conscious choices about which services they use or not. This 
should happen through visible and easy -to-read data policies. Save in 
exceptional circumstances, decisions to carry out surveillance should be 
transparent and open to challenge or appeal. There should be particular care 
for services, such as EdTech, which are used by children and students who may 
be unable – or feel that they are unable – to opt out; the most privacy -protective 
option of such services should be offered by default.  
4) The right to anonymity is an important one, and restrictions on this should not 
be made without serious reflection : online  anonymity is an important way of 
safeguarding rights, especially for people or groups at risk of persecution or 
unreasonable discrimination otherwise. While it is important to be able to 
ensure that actions that are illegal offline are also illegal online , efforts to 
identify perpetrators should be strictly proportionate and necessary, and not 
jeopardise the rights of others. This is likely to require further reflection and 
discussion on how best to do this.   
5) People should have an idea of how their data i s being used : it is important that 
there is transparency around data and collection and use as a precondition for 
people to be able to exercise their rights and choice. This should include the 
possibility to refuse data collection, as well as choose which uses are made of 
data.  
 
What Actions Should Governments Take?  
 
1) Both in their own services, and in the rules they impose on others, ensure 
strong data governance and protection :  Governments are already heavily 
engaged in use of data and so should be mode ls both of respect for privacy and 
proportionate use, and in the way they communicate about this. It should be 
easy for citizens to know what data is held about them and how it is used. 
Similar obligations should be placed on other operators, in line with the level of 
risk that they may bring, and good practices encouraged. Breaches  and abuses 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
8 
 should be meaningfully punished. Policies should be flexible enough in order 
to adapt to evolving technologies.  
2) Support awareness raising and mobilisation in favour o f the protection of data : 
through education and wider communication, people should be conscious of 
the sort of data that is collected about them, and how it may be used. This is an 
essential part of wider digital literacy, and so should be integrated into efforts 
in this area. Crucially, people should be given the knowledge and confidence to 
be active in determining how their data is used.  
3) Avoid solutions to problems of internet governance that jeopardise the right to 
privacy: as indicated above, anonymity  is an important factor in allowing 
individuals and groups who may otherwise be subject to unjustified 
discrimination to express themselves. As such, any efforts to strengthen 
enforcement of the law, for example to catch criminals or tackle illegal hate 
speech, should take place without breaking the right of everyone to engage 
online anonymously  
 
See also suggestions around the application of human rights online.  
 
What Actions Should Libraries Take?  
  
1) Raise our game on data protection : given that this is an evolving space, 
libraries should keep up to date about the way that their patrons’ data is being 
used by third -party vendors. They should not sign contracts which have major 
privacy implications with out proper consideration and application of library 
values.  
2) Be a model as regards our own users’ data : while it is acceptable to use data -
based insights in order to support better service delivery, this should be done 
in a way that is respectful of privac y, and transparent to users. In doing so, 
libraries can offer a valuable less on to others.  
3) Discuss privacy in the community, and advocate for cybersecurity : arguably, 
protection of personal data is one pillar of wider digital literacy. Libraries 
should no t only explain w hy data protection is important and promote good 
digital hygiene in this respect, but also promote a more active approach to 
data, helping citizens themselves to mobilise in favour of privacy.   
 
 
APPLY  HUMAN  RIGHTS  ONLINE  
 
What Principles Should Apply  
 
1) Regulation to protect human rights should be dynamic, evolving with time : the 
evolution of technology means that the way in which rights are protected 
necessarily needs to evolve, in order to avoid becoming out of date. As a result, 
it is imp ortant to have an approach that can adapt over time, and so ensure that 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
9 
 rights themselves – and in particular those areas where rights need to be 
balanced against each other – evolve with the times.  
2) It is essential to listen to groups which are at risk of having their rights not 
respected : it is a basic principle that we can best understand impacts of action 
(or inaction) on people’s rights by talking to them. As such, groups at risk of 
seeing their r ights put into question need structures and opportunities to raise 
their voices, and for these to be taken seriously.   
3) Awareness of human rights is an essential step towards their achievement : we 
need to invest in building people’s understanding of the ri ghts they have, and 
promoting a critical approach in their engagement with the internet and the 
wider digital world. This is a precondition for promoting active digital 
citizenship, as well as fuller respect for the rights of others.  
4) Freedom of speech sho uld not be abused in order to normalise hate : freedom 
of expression is a key and fundamental right, but like all other human rights 
must be applied in ways that recognises that other rights exist and deserve 
protection. Therefore, while simply disagreeing with someone else in no way 
represents a reason for trying to censor them, where speech does – or incites 
others to – leave others less able to enjoy their own rights, there is reason to 
act.   
5) Violation of human rights should lead to corrective action : there need to be 
clear penalties for actions that unjustifiably infringe the rights of others online. 
Ensuring the rule of law on the internet is also important for overall confidence 
in the internet as a space for economic, social, cultural and civic life.  
 
See also answers above concerning the importance of the right of access to 
information, the right not to be online, net neutrality, and privacy.  
 
What Actions Should Governments Take?  
 
1) Explore the opportunity of producing digital constitutions or bills of rights : it is 
important always to reaffirm that human rights apply as much online as they 
do offline. Working towards digital constitutions or bills of rights can be a 
helpful way of fo cusing attention and addressing key difficult issues.  
2) Establish principles around treatment of hate speech online : the internet 
should, as far as possible, not serve to propagate hate or discrimination. 
Governments should look to act in this area in ways that respect the principles 
of proportionality, and the maximum respect for both sets of rights. For 
example, it is important to avoid situations where platforms are incentivised to 
go too far in one direction or the other. Automated policing should be avo ided 
as far as possible, given the weakness of algorithms in making difficult 
judgements.  In parallel, further efforts to promote citizenship and social 
cohesion are necessary – not all of society’s problems are going to be solved 
through internet governa nce! 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
10 
 3) Provide simpler mechanisms for people to uphold their rights online : it should 
be possible for people to seek redress in situations where their rights have 
been unjustifiably infringed, without the complexity of a long court case. A 
form of digital ri ghts defender or ombudsperson could be helpful in this 
respect, providing an initial means of assessing whether further legal action is 
needed, or, preferably, finding a rapid solution.   
4) Support human rights literacy work : governments should provide suppo rt for 
initiatives that deliver human rights literacy for all, in forms that work best for 
learners. It may be best for such education to come through more neutral or 
third -party sources in order to be most effective. Such efforts should not only 
be target ed at school -age children, but at people of all ages.    
5) Obligation on governments themselves companies to set out how they intend 
to uphold human rights : in addition to human rights impact assessments on 
digital legislation, larger companies themselves sh ould be obliged to develop 
documentation where they set out how they will uphold rights in their 
activities. This will allow for greater accountability and clarity for users.  
6) Implement pro -equality legislation : one particular human right that is still too  
often violated is that of people with disabilities to information. Governments 
can help here by accelerating efforts to ratify or accede to the Treaty of 
Marrakesh, and then to implement it in an expansive and positive manner. This 
will remove harmful cop yright -related barriers to providing access for 
beneficiaries, and will be complemented by meaningful investment in the 
creation of accessible format works, and support for those institutions and 
organisations working with people with print disabilities.  
 
What Actions Should Libraries Take?  
 
1) Take a leading role in promoting human rights in the information space : as 
institutions founded in the first place in order to deliver one fundamental right – 
that of access to information – libraries should look at tak ing a more proactive 
role in promoting and defending other rights in the information space, building 
on longstanding work around information policy and ethics. Through this, they 
can support digital citizenship efforts, as concerns people’s ability to reco gnise 
and defend both their own rights, and those of other people. Such efforts can 
be proactive (training, events) but also more reactive (ensuring availability of 
resources, operating a rights helpdesk).  
2) Advocate for the defence and promotion of rights online : at the systemic level, 
library associations and agencies can bring much to policy discussions, again 
drawing on libraries’ expertise and experience in defending rights in the digital 
space.  
3) Ensure maximum access to information for people with disabilities : libraries 
have a particular responsibility to support access to information for people with 
disabilities and should therefore both maximise the range of accessible content 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
11 
 they can provide,  and address any factors in their buildings and programming 
that may serve to exclude people from enjoying this right.   
 
See also answers above concerning protecting data, ensuring connectivity  
 
ACCOUNTABILITY  FOR  DISCRIMINATION  AND  MISLEADING  CONTENT   
 
What Principles Should Apply  
 
1) The principles of the Christchurch Call should be endorsed : the principles set 
out in the Christchurch Call  are valuable and relevant in their focus on 
addressing extreme an d violent content in a way that protects rights online.  
2) Everyone has a right of access to inclusive and accurate information : it is 
important to remember that a key function of the right of access to information 
is to empower and enable people to fulfil t heir potential and realise other 
rights. As such, it is worth underlining the importance of accuracy and 
relevance in the information people receive, rather than just assuming that any 
information is good information.  
3) Act to resolve problems at the root a s a priority : as set out above, it is not 
through internet governance that we will resolve all of the problems of the 
world. The best defence against discriminatory and misleading content is to 
develop the skills, values and reflexes people need to defend themselves.  
4) Governments must lead by example : as set out in Our Common Agenda, it 
must be unacceptable for governments to mislead their own people. This is not 
just a case of ethics, but also of policy effectiveness, given that if people do not 
believe de cision -makers, they are less likely to trust or follow them.  
5) Voluntary codes of conduct can play an important role : as highlighted above, a 
first key step is to encourage a proactive, transparent approach by companies 
themselves. Published voluntary codes  of conduct can help in this respect, 
providing a reference point and allowing for accountability.  
6) There needs to be a balance between free speech and action : closely linked to 
the above, and to points made repeatedly above, there are rights here that are  
in tension, and simply defending one at the expense of the other is not a good 
idea. Furthermore, it is clear that accusations of discrimination or misleading 
content can be used maliciously to silence dissent or disagreement, including 
by government. The  principles resulting from this process should in no way 
justify such behaviour.  
7) The interests of researchers, today and tomorrow, should be remembered : it is 
important to acknowledge that a first step towards addressing the phenomena 
of discrimination an d misleading content is understanding them. For this, 
researchers need to be able to access, copy and hold content that may indeed 
not be appropriate for public consumption.  
8) Combatting misinformation, in part, is a collective responsibility : we do need 
to do what we can to build respect for accuracy in information, as well as help 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
12 
 people to cope with inevitable uncertainty, rather than reaching to simple but 
wrong solutions. For example, people do need to understand better why they 
should check things befo re they share.  
 
What Actions Should Governments Take?  
 
1) Adopt the Christchurch Principles : these offer a valuable overall approach to 
addressing questions around extreme content which at the same time 
recognising the need for proportionality and respect for other rights.   
2) Support reliable sources of information like libraries, as well as prom oting 
open access : in order to deliver on the right to accurate and relevant 
information, libraries have a key role to play, especially for those who do not 
have the resources to buy or licence materials. For them to do their job, they 
need to have the res ources and staff to meet the (accurate) information needs 
of their communities. There should also be further moves to drive forwards 
open access, including meaningful open science  (open research) plans, 
secondary publication rights for publicly funded rese arch, and pursuit of green 
or diamond open access plans that do impose costs on researchers, as well as 
reforms of copyright to allow libraries to support people’s information in a 
digital world.  
3) Make media and information literacy a key skill in curricul a for learning 
throughout life: such skills are also key for wider engagement with the internet, 
but are particularly useful here. Clearly, such skills need to be taught effectively, 
and so there needs also to be investment in understanding what works best .   
4) Avoid unnecessarily politicising the concept of misinformation : governments 
need to adopt a high level of honesty and accuracy in their own work. They 
should be held to a high standard of integrity, and avoid using accusations of 
‘fake news’ to dismiss legitimate criticisms and dissent. More generally, they 
should wo rk to reassert the value of facts, including through better education 
around how to manage inevitable uncertainty.  
5) Meaningful action against those guilty of discrimination and deliberately 
spreading harmful misinformation : laws against these should be enf orced 
properly, in parallel with more positive efforts to build skills. Original culprits 
should be the prime target of such efforts, rather than just social media 
platforms, although these too should be expected to show a level of 
responsibility commensur ate with their size, and without undermining other 
rights.  
 
What Actions Should Libraries Take?  
 
1) Maximise access to information in their collections : libraries should reflect on 
what more they can do to facilitate access to reliable information by users, 
including through programming, doing more online, and awareness raising in 
general. Hand in hand with this, promoting critical thinking through courses 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
13 
 and the availability of materials represents a further contribution. This work 
does not need to be a sol o effort – there are possibilities to work with partners, 
as well as to design systemic efforts within the field.  
2) Reflect on the needs of people facing marginalisation : efforts to combat 
misinformation and discrimination are universally relevant, but it r emains the 
case that some will have more access to other source should be targeted, as far 
as possible, at those who may have low skills.   
3) Advocate for effective, balanced approaches : libraries are very well placed to 
join campaigns for stronger media and  information literacy, more 
comprehensive open access policies, and copyright reforms that will enable 
them to give greater access to their own collections, rather than leaving people 
to rely on what they find on the internet.   
4) Ensure up to date training for library staff : library staff themselves need to be 
up to speed on the way the internet works, and in particular how 
misinformation and other damaging content spreads. They would benefit also 
from training on how best to share this knowledge with users.   
 
REGULATION  OF ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  
 
What Principles Should Apply  
 
1) Tools using algorithms and big data should be subject to regulation: as with 
any other activity, it is important to have rules and principles that help ensure 
that the public interest is safeguarded, and that we do not lose control. Used in 
certain ways, AI does have the potential to lead to a loss of control by 
communities , making this all the more important.  
2) Rules around artificial intelligence should be based on strong ethical principles : 
AI clearly has the potential to provide a major boost to research and service 
delivery, in libraries and beyond. At the same time, in order to avoid a loss of 
credibility, it needs to work in ways that are demonstrably in line with ethical 
principles, and which certainly do not work to create or extend discrimination. 
Regulation therefore needs to take a proportionate, principles based a pproach, 
in line with the approach to any other new technology.  
 
What Actions Should Governments Take?  
 
1) Act to ensure that an ethical approach is followed in the development of AI : 
this does not mean that there necessarily needs to be specific legislation  for AI, 
rather that there is more general legislation applying to any new technology 
that looks to safeguard human rights and ensure that ethics are applied in 
decision -making, r ather than letting efficiency and profit guide things . Ensure 
that this frame work is clear and easy to apply, and has ad equate monitoring 
and oversight possibilities . At the same time, remove unnecessary barriers to 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
14 
 Ai research, such as those created by copyright laws that hinder text and data 
mining.  
 
What Actions Should Libraries  Take?  
 
1) Apply AI technologies ethically in the context of library operations : libraries 
have a duty to their users to provide the best possible service, and AI tools can 
certainly contribute to this. At the same, time, libraries need also to be models 
of how to apply such methods in ways that respect ethics and contribute to 
wider development, for example through understanding as far as possible how 
they work, and what potential risks there might be.  
2) Support education around AI : libraries in some countries have already started 
to offer training around AI in order to help users become more aware of what it 
means, and so better able to make conscious decisions. The same goes for 
librarians themselves, as data creators and facilitators of use by others.   
 
 
DIGITAL  COMMONS  AS A GLOBAL  PUBLIC  GOOD  
 
What Principles Should Apply   
 
1) We need to consider knowledge – and in particular open science (open 
research) – as a global public good : as underlined by UNESCO in its Future of 
Education Report, we need to consider knowledge itself as a global commons – 
a public good that serves to advance humanity as a whole, and to which 
everyone should have access, both for reasons of equity, but also  practicality, 
given that we can best build the knowledge commons when everyone is able to 
contribute. Open science (open research) , as promoted in UNESCO’s 
Recommendations, is a key part of this, making a recognised contribution to 
supporting the achievem ent of the Sustainable Development Goals for 
example.  
2) We need to consider the implications of sanctions and other 
intergovernmental restrictions on individuals’ ability to benefit from global 
public goods : one point raised by contributors was the fact that  benefitting 
from the public goods depends very much on the possibility to access 
hardware, connectivity, and research information itself. While sanctions 
targeting individual leaders responsible for criminal acts may be justifiable, 
when these serve to sh ut out ordinary citizens from participating in the 
knowledge commons, this is more troubling.  
3) We need to promote community ownership and open licensing by default : we 
need to recognise that public goods need governance and support in order to 
ensure adequa te and sustainable supply. As set out in the UNESCO 
Recommendation concerning open science, it is important to support and 
encourage community ownership of relevant infrastructure. Similarly, open 
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
15 
 licensing has major benefits both as a basis for building p ublic goods, and in 
maximising access, and so should be encouraged, including through research 
and monitoring demonstrating the benefits of openness. Similarly, the costs of 
being closed should also be made clearer.  
 
What Actions Should Governments Take?  
 
1) Support Open Science /Open Research : in line with the UNESCO 
Recommendation, governments should develop plans and take action in order 
to facilitate open science (open research) , both within their own borders and in 
collaboration with others. This includes  funding infrastructures, adapting 
research policies, adapting evaluation frameworks to favour contributions to 
open research and education, and ensuring pro -openness mandates for 
research funding, as well as to consider the impact of other policies on ope n 
science. For example, platform regulation in the European Union has been 
driven forwards with next to no consideration of the impact of such steps on 
open access and open educational resource repositories. Clearly, too, copyright 
policies must be reforme d to ensure that openness is not considered as an 
exception, but rather as  
2) Support key knowledge commons infrastructures such as libraries : we would 
argue that libraries themselves are effectively a digital public good, given their 
role in facilitating ac cess to the internet and content, as well as encouraging 
and supporting people to contribute. Through this, they help deliver on the goal 
of other digital public goods. Key ways of doing this are set out above already, 
and including connecting all librarie s and providing adequate resources to 
ensure good connection quality, staffing and support. A particularly important 
aspect is to ensure inclusive access to technology.  
 
What Actions Should Libraries Take?  
 
1) Promote openness and diversity, and advocate for access to the public goods : 
libraries themselves should embrace their role in supporting digital public 
goods and the knowledge commons, and integrate this into their own planning 
and policies. They should b e active in identifying what restricts this access, and 
find solutions to these, either through their own work, or through advocating 
change more broadly.  
2) Ensure all communities can benefit : closely linked to the above, libraries should 
lead, or contribut e to efforts to assess where particular individuals or groups 
(such as indigenous communities) are being excluded from digital public 
goods.  
3) Contribute to openness infrastructures : in many cases, libraries themselves 
host, organise or curate digital publi c goods, such as repositories. These should 
also be run with the concept of a global public good in mind, i.e. in a way that 
maximises interoperability.    
Global Digital Compact: IFLA Submission  
16 
  
 
OTHER : COPYRIGHT  
 
What Principles Should Apply   
 
1) Ensure copyright frameworks fit for the digital age : a key challenge at the 
moment is that much of what takes place on the internet does so in a climate of 
uncertainty around copyright, making connectivity less valuable. The nature of 
the internet fits badly with an approach to copyright policy built around the 
assumption of a relatively small n umber of creators and publishers delivering 
information, in a one -way fashion, and working within national markets. We 
need a fundamental overhaul of copyright that recognises the rights and 
interests of users and the public policy goals that can be achiev ed through 
wider use of copyrighted content, without  taking away from the need to ensure 
that creators are rewarded for their work, and the value added by publishers 
and others in the chain is paid for.  
 
 
Governments should:  
1) Act promptly in order to remo te unnecessary impediments to the ability of 
libraries to carry out their missions in an online world  by updating copyright 
laws  
2) Work together to pass an international legal instrument that would both 
ensure a minimum set of digital -ready provisions for re search, education and 
access to culture , and enable cross -border activities such as remote teaching, 
research collaboration, and collaborative preservation networks.  
 
Libraries should  
1) Advocate for such reforms, in the interests of their users , in particula r those 
who are particularly disadvantaged by steps that discriminate against those 
who live in remote areas or who otherwise have challenges with mobility  
2) Use provisions that exist in a positive fashion in order to deliver on the rights 
of citizens, while also respecting the legitimate interests of rightholders  
 