 
1 
 
Response to the UN Secretary -General’s Technology Envoy on the 
Global Digital Compact  
Submission by the Internet Governance Forum’s Dynamic Coalition  
(IGF, DC) on Internet Standards, Security and Safety, Coalition (IS3C)  
Haarlem  The Netherlands , 21 April 2023  
This submission is prepared by the Internet Governance Forum’s Dynamic Coalition 
on Internet Standa rds, Security and Safety Coalition (IS3C), Global Digital Compact 
(GDC) team. As a world -wide stakeholder membership coalition, IS3C actively works 
towards, and is committed to, supporting the aims of the GDC in establishing an 
open, free, trusted and secu re digital future for all. In achieving the remits of the 
coalition’s aims and programme of work, IS3C members support the scope of the 
Compact, in particular, focusing on ensuring the security of digital technologies and 
applications, and to data protecti on. Our contribution sets out key proposals, along 
with practical steps to support the delivery of the commitments to action among the 
stakeholder groups.  
Proposal for an eighth thematic area:   Digital Security and Safety  
Opinion canvassed from IS3C member ship suggests that the Compact should 
include an additional thematic area focused on addressing world -wide demands for 
greater security and trust online. Internet and digital technologies would be more 
secure and safer if the principle of security -by-desig n was adopted throughout the 
development, manufacturing and procurement phases. Achieving this goal requires 
the active support of the technology industry sector, in particular the research 
community, standards developers, manufacturers to design and manuf acture secure -
by-design. The private and public sector’s supply chain and procurement agencies 
must demand security -by-design during the procurement of ICTs and digital 
technology.  
(i). Key principle: security -by-design  
Security -by-design is proposed as a key principle that would underpin the Compact’s 
critical focus on security and trust. IS3C members believe that adopting the principle 
of security -by-design would  address the needs of individual, corporate and public 
sector users for online security and sa fety. The results would lead to more effective, 
universal and rapid adoption of existing security -related internet  standards  and ICT 
best pract ices, many of which currently have not been actively deployed, in the 
markets for devices , network services  and ICT , often, due to costs, and a lack of 
awaren ess. 
(ii). Commitments to action  
The IS3C membership recommends that the principle of security -by-design should be 
adopted and implemented through commitments to action by the following 
stakeholder groups.     
 
2 
 
1. Designers and developers  of new and emergin g digital technologies, 
devices and applications, commit to embedding the principle of security -by-
design in their activities and projects with the result that their devices and 
applications deploy the latest relevant security -related standards and best 
practices.  
2. Manufacturers  of devices and network applications commit to requiring the 
deployment of the latest relevant security -related standards and best practices 
in the specifications of their product lines.  
3. Procurement agencies and corporate purchasers  comm it to demanding 
from suppliers secure by design products, services, applications and devices.  
4. Procurement agencies and corporate purchasers  cooperate with 
suppliers  in ensuring the maintenance, review and updating of the security 
requirements and provis ion of the devices and network applications which they 
procure in order to ensure their long -term sustainability, without fear of early 
obsolescence and vulnerability to new means of attack and criminal misuse.  
5. Educational and vocational training establ ishments  commit to including 
in their curricula and training modules comprehensive information relating to 
cybersecurity requirements, including up -to-date information about current 
security -related technical standards. This would ensure that graduates and  
new entrants in the cyber industry have the necessary technical skills that the 
industry requires for the design and development of new devices and 
applications.  
6. The manufacturing sector  commits to promoting greater transparency 
about the security spec ifications of their products and to making available to 
procurers and users the necessary information so that they are better informed 
about their security and safety.   
7. Manufacturers and suppliers  commit to ensuring that procurement 
agencies and supply chain managers are kept up -to-date with the latest up -
dates and data on the  deployment of security -related standards in their digital 
products.     
 
 
These stakeholder commitments are set out in the table attached to this submission 
at Annex A: together w ith a general statement on cooperative actions to increase 
consumer awareness of the importance of greater security, safety and trust online . 
The members of the IGF’s IS3C coalition believe that a higher level of trust in the 
Internet will be achieved through the adoption of the principle of security -by-design 
along with implementation of the commitments to action, and the cooperation by key 
stakeholders as listed above. The IS3C proposal includes policies and actions that 
will e nsure a trusted and predictable way ahead for current and emerging digital 
technologies to contribute to enhancing social and economic welfare. In addition, 
successful delivery will reduce online risks and threats in all countries and regions 
that are curr ently experienced.  
 
3 
 
As a multi -stakeholder coalition representing our world -wide membership, IS3C is 
ready to contribute to the delivery of the GDC’s actions to successfully implement the 
Compact, as will be agreed; and, contribute to the successful launch of the GDC at 
the Summit of the Future in September 2024. Further information about IS3C’s aims 
and programmes of work are available on the Internet Governance Forum’s website: 
https://www.intgovforum.org/en/content/internet -standards -security -and-safety -
coalition -is3c and the IS3C website:  https://is3coalition.org/ . 
Please feel free to contact us for further information.  
With best regards,   
The IS3C GDC Team:  
Dr Allison Wylde (Chair GDC team, IS3C)  
Mr Mark Carvell (Senior Policy Advisor, IS3C)  
Mr Wout de Natris (Co -ordinator IS3C, contact for correspondence)  
 
Submit ted by:   
Mr Wout de Natris, Coordinator, IGF Dynamic Coalition on Internet Standards, 
Security and Safety (IS3C)  
E: wout.denatris@is3coalition.org  
 
Annex A   
 
4 
 
Annex A  
Response to the UN Secretary -General’s Technology Envoy on the Global Digital 
Compact: Submission by the Internet Governance Forum’s Dynamic Coalition (IGF, 
DC);   Internet Standards, Security and Safety, Coalition (IS3C)  
 
Table 1. Commitments to Action an d Leading Stakeholders  
 
Commitments to Action  Key Stakeholders  
1.          Adoption of the principle of 
security by design regardless of cost 
throughout the development and 
manufacturing stages of Internet devices 
and applications.  Emerging technologies’ researchers, designers and developers 
of new digital devices and application s; with the support of 
national and regional governmental bodies and administrations.  
2. Adoption and implementation of 
current security -related standards.  Supply s ide: Developers, manufacturers and suppliers of digital 
devices , services,  soft and hard ware, ICT and network 
applications.  
Demand side: Governmental procurement agencies; industry 
purchasing  departments ; top management buy -in; consumer 
advocacy organisations ; consumers . 
 
3. Inclusion in educational curricula 
on cybersecurity and training manuals; 
comprehensive and up -to-date information 
and advice on securit y-related standards.  Educational and vocational training establishments; with the 
support of national and regional education administrations, 
representative technology institutions and the standards 
development organisations (SDOs) including the Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IET F) , the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU),  ISO, IEEE, NIST, NSA , ??.   
4. Establishment of data governance 
requirements and mechanisms that build 
greater trust amongst private, corporate 
and public sector users.  Private an d public sector policymakers, data and information 
regulators; with the support of digital technology manufacturers 
and suppliers  
5. Increasing consumer awareness 
on how to ensure greater online security, 
protection and the safer use of digital 
devices and a pplications.  National and regional administrations, consumer protection 
agencies , consumer advocacy organisations  and private sector 
providers of consumer advice.   
 