 
 
 SBU - 
DELIBER
ATIVE 
PROCES 
 
GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
FREEDOM ONLINE COALITION SUBMISSION  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1. Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  4 
2. Avoid internet fragmentation  9 
3. Protect data  11 
4. Apply human rights online  12 
4. Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  15 
6. Regulation of artificial intelligence  17 
 
 
 
I. Details  
Please select whether you are answering this survey for yourself or on behalf of an entity or 
organization. Note: If you are providing information on behalf of an entity or organization, it will be 
understood to represent a submission from the entire entity or organization and will be reflected on 
the public site accordingly.  
● Individual  
● Entity/Organization  
 
Name of entity/organization - Freedom Online Coalition  
 
Type of entity/organization -  
● Academia/research institution/think tank   
● Civil society or non -governmental organization         
● Government   
● International, regional or multilateral organization      
● Media    
● Private sector/Corporation   
● Technical community    
● Other (please specify)          
 
Description of entity/organization:  
 
The Freedom Online Coalition (FOC)  is an intergovernmental coalition that was established at the 
inaugural Freedom Online Conference in The Hague, the Netherlands, December 2011. Since its 
inception, the FOC has been committed to advancing internet freedom – free expression, 
association, a ssembly, and privacy online – worldwide. The FOC believes that the human rights 
that people have offline must also be protected online, and commits to working together, and with 
all stakeholders who share these views, to support Internet freedom and protec t human rights 
online worldwide.  
 
FOC member states are committed to work together diplomatically to voice concern over measures 
to restrict Internet Freedom, support those individuals whose human rights online are curtailed, and 
ensure Internet freedom an d issues related to digital technologies are on the international policy 
agenda as a way to drive concrete solutions and outcomes.  
 
 
2 
  Since 2011, the Coalition membership has grown to include 361 Member States, spanning from 
Africa to Asia, Europe, the Amer icas, and the Middle East.  
 
The Coalition has an annually rotating Chair. Each year, in consultation with other FOC member 
states and the FOC Advisory Network, the incoming FOC Chair develops a Program of Action 
which outlines the FOC’s vision, priorities and activities for the respective year. In 2023, the FOC is 
chaired by the United States.  
 
Entity/organization website - https://freedomonlinecoalition.com/   
 
Geographic Scope of Activity - 
● Global  
● Regional  
● Country  
 
Contact information for submission  
● Name  - Zora Gouhary  
● Title - Senior Programme Lead, Support Unit  
● Email Address - zora@gp -digital.org  
● Email address (confirm) - zora@gp -digital.org  
 
II. Process of consultation/preparation  
Describe the process you followed to collect, consult, and prepare your input.  
 
Canada, Freedom Online Coalition (FOC) Chair 2022, commissioned the FOC sub -entities, i .e. 
issue -based multistakeholder working groups, to prepare submissions for input into the GDC. FOC 
sub-entities, including the Silicon Valley Working Group, the Task Force on Artificial Intelligence 
and Human Rights, the Task Force on Digital Equality and  the Task Force on Internet Shutdowns, 
held consultations and developed separate submissions on specific areas identified in the GDC 
survey, and relevant to the sub -entities’ focus.   
 
Each sub -entity is composed of a number of FOC member states and FOC Ad visory Network 
members - an independent group of non -governmental stakeholders advising the FOC 
governments on priority issues. In addition, some of the groups, such as the Task Force on 
Internet Shutdowns, are open to external non -governmental consultees who offer their expertise on 
the issues at hand.  
 
Following these consultations, the completed separate submissions were finalised and shared with 
Canada, FOC Chair 2022, and the FOC Support Unit, which acts as the Coalition’s secretariat. The 
received submissions were then compiled into one final submiss ion to the GDC survey.  
 
What is the approximate number of entities  that were engaged through process of 
consultation/preparation of input?  
0-25 
26-50 
51-100 
More than 100 (please specify)  
 
What is the approximate number of people  engaged through process of consultation/preparation of 
input?  
1-4 
5-25 
26-50 
51-100 
101-500 
 
1 Currently, the FOC consists of thirty -six members: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, the Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, the R epublic of Maldives, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Slovakia, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, the United Kingdom and the United States.  
 
3 
  501-1000  
More than 1000 (please specify)  
 
III. Inputs to the Global Digital Compact  
There are seven areas of the Global Digital Compact mentioned in the Secretary -General’s 
Common Agenda  on which you are invited to submit inputs. In addition, if there are any additional 
areas that you feel should also be included in the Global Compact, please submit them under the 
category of “Other Areas” below.   
 
For each area, we ask that you submit y our views and inputs, organized along the following two 
aspects:  
a)  Core principles that all governments, companies, civil society organisations and other 
stakeholders should adhere to  
b)  Key commitments, pledges, or actions that in your view should be t aken by different 
stakeholders – governments, private sector, civil society, etc. - in order to realize the above -
mentioned principles (please be as specific and action -oriented as possible.)  
  
While submissions in this form are limited to 2500 characters per text box, you may also submit 
any additional inputs or elaboration (submission to be made in PDF format) via email to 
digitalcompact@un.org. Please note, however, that while your submission will be made available 
online subsequently, it will not be par t of automated data visualization results which is based on 
this form.  
 
Please select the areas on which you would like to submit inputs  
A. Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  
B. Avoid internet fragmentation  
C. Protect data  
D. Apply human rights online  
E. Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
F. Regulation of artificial intelligence  
G. Digital commons as a global public good  
H. Other areas  
 
For each area that you selected previously, we ask that you submit your views and inputs, 
organized along the following two aspects:  
i)  Core principles that all governments, companies, civil society organisations and other 
stakeholders should adhere to; and  
ii)  Key commitments, pledges, or actions that in your view should be taken by different 
stakeholders – governments, private sector, civil society, etc.  
 
 
 
  
 
4 
  1. Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
● Digital inclusion  to ensure that societies can participate meaningfully and equitably in all 
aspects of society, both online and offline.2  
 
● Digital inclusion includes reliable and meaningful connectivity  and access, bridging digital 
divides worldwide.3  
 
KEY COMMITMENTS , PLEDGES, AND ACTIONS  
      
This section refers to key commitments, pledges, and calls to action outlined in several FOC joint 
statements and underpinning documents:  
 
The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online4 
 
● Advance digital inclusion internationally to promote a rules -based, democratic, and inclusive 
world where human rights and fundamental freedoms are upheld in online and digital 
contexts, with the goal of ensuring everyone can fully enjoy their human rights  online.  
 
● Advocate for a global, free, open, interoperable, secure and reliable Internet, to resist Internet 
fragmentation and promote accountable, inclusive, and responsive democratic societies, at 
priority forums, including the United Nations, while wor king towards overcoming digital 
divides, advocating for ubiquitous, secure, affordable, equitable, and high -quality connectivity.  
 
● Support policies, initiatives, education and research that increase digital literacy and empower 
individuals to think critica lly about the information they are consuming and sharing, effectively 
advocating for risk mitigation and to taking steps to keep themselves and others safe while 
navigating diverse online spaces.  
 
● Collaborate with domestic and international initiatives an d partnerships that advocate for safe 
and equitable online spaces for everyone, elevating traditionally excluded voices, such as 
youth, women and girls, as well as persons or groups in a vulnerable situation, such as, 
Indigenous Peoples, LGBTI persons, rac ial and ethnic minorities, persons belonging to 
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, persons with disabilities, and older 
persons, through the UN and other international fora, with specific focus on closing the 
gender digital divide and  preventing and responding to the exposure of online gender -based 
violence, harassment and abuse.  
 
 
10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration5 
 
● We will redouble our efforts in working together for free, open, interoperable, secure, and 
reliable Internet worldwide through promoting at the UN and other international fora initiatives 
and partnerships for achieving universal access to the Internet by 2030.  
 
Joint Statement on Digital Inclusion6  
 
2 Cited directly from the Freedom Online Coalition, The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online , 2022.   
3 Cited directly from the Freedom Online Coalition, Program of Action , 2022.   
4 In 2022, the FOC adopted the Ottawa Agenda , which provides a set of recommendations for freedom online to reflect the 
evolution of the Coalition’s vision and scope of work since its i nception in 2011. The recommendations were developed with 
input from FOC Members, Advisory Network representatives, and external stakeholders through domestic consultations in 
Canada and regional consultations held in North America, Latin America, Europe, Middle East & North Africa, Sub -Saharan 
Africa, and the Asia -Pacific.  
5 Freedom Online Coalition, 10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration , 2021.  
6 In 2020, the FOC adopted a joint statement  on digital inclusion, which recognizes t he importance of meaningful digital 
inclusion in enabling people to exercise their human rights more fully, but also acknowledges that digital inclusion poses bo th 
collateral opportunities and risks. The statement builds on a number of other commitments to  promote digital equality, with 
initiatives to overcome various digital divides having been launched by a plethora of stakeholders, from civil society 
organisations to the private sector; governments; and various UN organisations tasked with working toward s the SDGs.  
 
5 
   
● The conduct and support of good quality, independent research, on supply and demand side 
challenges affecting digital inclusion and digital divides. Research activities should investigate 
existing and emerging issues related to digital access that may nega tively affect digital 
inclusion by deterring Internet use, such as human rights violations and abuses relating to 
privacy, online abuse, censorship, surveillance and other cybersecurity methods that limit 
individuals’ ability to exercise their human rights  and fundamental freedoms. Governments 
should also encourage more efforts by the private sector to publish independent, research 
based reviews on their data sets, conducted within an ethical, privacy -protective framework.  
 
● Civil society organizations shou ld be supported in their efforts to address barriers and 
bottlenecks to digital access, cybersecurity risks, and on how to develop policy that drives 
positive outcomes related to the improved access and use of digital technologies. Moreover, 
all stakeholde rs should be encouraged to share best practices on issues pertaining to 
bridging digital divides, especially in support of community networks, and enabling digital 
inclusion, and governments should play a supportive role in facilitating this.  
 
● Welcoming c ontributions, and leadership, by the private sector and civil society to promote 
digital inclusion. Encourage the private sector to ensure that resources accrued for the 
purpose of overcoming digital divides are used transparently for their intended purpos e in line 
with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.  
 
● Encouraging the availability of free Internet access points in public spaces, especially in 
schools and libraries in economically underprivileged communities.  
 
● Promoting open -source software, open access technologies, open data, and open learning 
towards enabling meaningful access, as well as supporting the people who develop these 
resources.  
 
● Enacting digital policies which give special consideration to those who face particular 
difficulties in reaping the benefits of digital inclusion. Governments should build into their 
programs and policies safeguards to make sure these persons are able to benefit fully in the 
push for digital inclusion. These may consist of, inter alia, creating safe and accessible 
spaces, childcare facilities and specially trained support staff.  
 
● Advancing, with the help of public -private partnerships, digital literacy and other technology 
training in trusted and comfortable locations (libraries, community cente rs, places of worship, 
schools, recreation centers, senior centers, etc.) which is tailored for different levels of 
education and specific needs and supported.  
 
● Facilitating, reinforcing, and developing multi -stakeholder models of Internet governance, 
including growing capacity of civil society to participate in fora like the Internet Governance 
Forum, expanding availability of independent Internet exchange points , ensuring ability of 
private sector providers to connect and exchange data traffic directly with one another, and 
similar inclusive models.  
 
● Addressing underlying causes of digital exclusion (economic, social, political and cultural 
contexts) because tec hnical solutions alone will not bridge digital divides; and support 
initiatives at intergovernmental spaces that further digital inclusion.  
 
Joint Statement on Defending Civic Space Online7 
 
● The FOC calls on all governments to promote vibrant and resilient civic space, including 
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy , and the rule of law, 
 
7 In this joint statement , the FOC expresses concern about shrinking civic and democratic spaces online as a result of state -
sponsored obstruction of free expressio n, peaceful assembly, and free association. The FOC recognizes the Internet as an 
invaluable tool for human rights defenders and civil society and notes that civic space online is integral to a vibrant civic  space 
offline. It further recognizes that state -sponsored obstruction of these rights is a direct challenge to the FOC’s goal of protecting 
and promoting both the exercise of human rights online and an open and interoperable Internet. The statement highlights that a 
robust and protected civic space form s the cornerstone of accountable, inclusive, and responsive democratic societies.  
 
6 
  consistent with their obligations under the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights 
in particular, which is central to the maintenance and development of an open, interoperable, 
reliable, and secure Internet.  
 
● Bearing in mind States’ international obligations under international human rights law, the 
FOC calls upon:  
 
o (a) all stakeholders to work together to ensure that the Internet is designed and 
governed in a manner that respects human rights and enables individuals to engage 
in civic space;  
 
o (b) governments, the private sector, international organizations, and civil society, to 
work together toward a shared approach -firmly grounded in respect for international 
human rights law -to evaluate, respond to, and remedy Sta te-sponsored efforts to 
unduly restrict civic space, and business practices that inappropriately contribute to, 
facilitate, or cause restriction.  
 
● Governments should consult where possible with civil society in the development of laws and 
policies, includ ing those on counter -terrorism, national security, cybercrime and cybersecurity, 
as well those that impact encryption and anonymity online, to help ensure that these laws and 
policies are consistent with States’ obligations under international human rights  law.  
 
● The FOC calls on all governments to refrain from using counter -terrorism, national security, 
cybercrime, cyber -security, anti -terrorism and anti -cybercrime measures and laws to unduly 
limit the ability of human rights defenders to exercise their human righ ts. Any such legislation, 
new or existing, should be evaluated against potential adverse effects on human rights.  
 
● The FOC encourages governments to protect and promote civic space through laws and 
policies that expand access to emerging technologies such  as blogs, private messaging apps, 
and over -the-top services rather than restricting their use through overreaching regulation and 
the imposition of high compliance burdens that inhibit access.  
 
● The FOC recognizes the crucial role of the information and c ommunication technology 
(ICT)sector to respect human rights. The FOC encourages companies to engage in multi -
stakeholder initiatives and explore best practices in line with the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights.  
 
Joint Statement on Internet Censorship8  
 
● The FOC calls on all governments to refrain from content restrictions on the Internet that 
violate international human rights law and to create an enabling environment for free 
expression and access to information online.  
 
● States must not restrict, modera te, or manipulate online content, disrupt networks to deny 
users access to information, or employ internet censorship technologies, contrary to their 
international obligations. At the same time, states should play a constructive role in working 
with ICT co mpanies to enhance transparency regarding their content moderation and 
mediation processes, including those that are automated. Governments should also 
encourage ICT companies to adopt fair remedial mechanisms in contentious cases.  
 
● The FOC firmly believe s in the value of free and informed political debate, offline and online, 
and its positive effects on long term political stability. The Coalition calls on governments, the 
private sector, international organizations, civil society, and Internet stakeholde rs to work 
 
8 In this joint statement , the FOC expresses deep concern about the growing trend of state -sponsored Internet censorship, 
which challenges Coalition’s goals of protecting and promoting human rights online and protecting and extending an open and 
interoperable Internet. To  address this trend, the FOC calls upon governments to refrain from content restrictions on the 
Internet that violate international human rights law and to create an enabling environment for free expression and access to 
information online. Furthermore, it  calls upon all stakeholders “to work together toward a shared approach – firmly grounded in 
respect for international human rights law – that aims to evaluate, respond to, and if necessary, remedy state -sponsored efforts 
to restrict, moderate, or manipula te online content, and that calls for greater transparency of private Internet companies’ 
mediation, automation, and remedial policies.”  
 
7 
  together toward a shared approach - firmly grounded in respect for international human rights 
law - that aims to evaluate, respond to, and if necessary, remedy state -sponsored efforts to 
restrict, moderate, or manipulate online content, and that  calls for greater transparency of 
private Internet companies’ mediation, automation, and remedial policies.  
 
Contribution from t he FOC Task Force on Digital Equality  
Please note that the views of the Task Force on Digital Equality do not necessarily reflect the 
opinions of the full FOC membership.  
 
Building on the FOC’s Joint Statement on Digital Inclusion , the Task Force on Digital Equality aims 
to translate the statement’s recommendations into concrete action that has tangible, positive 
outcomes for promoting digital equality. Task Force defines connectivity and access as ex tending 
universal, open, secure, reliable, affordable, high -quality Internet access:  
 
Connectivity and Access  
Term  Definition  
Universal  ● Exploring new regulatory models including community -level governance to 
increase access.  
● Supporting small -scale networks, community -owned and locally -owned 
telecommunications infrastructure towards reaching last -mile coverage and 
providing services that meet local needs.  
● Expanding availability of independent Internet exchange points, ensuring  
ability of private sector providers to connect and exchange data traffic directly 
with one another, and similar inclusive models.  
● Providing free Internet access points in public spaces, especially in schools 
and libraries in economically underprivileged communities.  
● Enabling equal access to information and content by supporting and upholding 
strong net neutrality protections.  
● Facilitating, reinforcing, and developing multi -stakeholder models of Internet 
governance, including growing capacity of civil soc iety to participate in fora like 
the Internet Governance Forum.  
Open  ● Enabling and promoting the development and use of open -source software, 
open access technologies, open data, and open learning towards enabling 
meaningful access, as well as supporting the people who develop these 
resources.  
Secure  ● Providing secure public access points or those that lend electronic devices to 
individuals or communities who need them.  
● Developing and promoting policies and techniques that create secure spaces 
online including cyber security, encryption, and data protection while 
protecting against the misuse of such measures in a way that violates human 
rights.  
Affordable  ● Ensuring the cost of access to broadband and mobile ownership is affordable 
including through avoiding levying high taxes on consumers and mobile 
operators.  
Reliable 
and High -
quality  
 ● Expanding access to and building infrastructure for underserved areas and 
populations.  
● Working with internet service providers to ensure connectivity is reliable and of 
high quality and data packages are affordable.  
 
The Task Force on Digital Equality defines “digital equality” as digital inclusion that is equitable, 
accessible, inclusive, safe, meaningful and human -rights respecting:  
 
Digital Equality  
Term  Definition  
Equitable  ● Bridging the gender digital divide from a human rights perspective. This 
includes addressing factors that result in the withdrawal of women, girls and 
gender diverse individuals from digital and civic spaces such as gendered 
disinformation and online gende r based violence, including sexual violence, 
harassment and abuse.  
 
8 
  ● Addressing underlying causes of digital exclusion and discrimination 
(economic, social, political and cultural contexts), including gendered causes.  
● Ensuring that AI algorithms do not rein force harmful stereotypes and biases 
that discriminate on the grounds of sex, age, disability, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, race, ethnicity, origin, language, religion, or any other 
grounds.  
● Addressing supply and demand -side challenges affecting d igital inclusion and 
digital divides, such as digital gender divides.  
● Supporting research to understand drivers of digital exclusion.  This includes 
encouraging more efforts by the private sector to publish independent, 
research -based reviews on their dat a sets, conducted within an ethical, 
privacy -protective framework.  
● Encouraging the public and private sector to ensure that resources accrued 
for the purpose of overcoming gender, age and other digital divides are used 
equitably and transparently for thei r intended purpose.  
● Embedding gender equality and non -discrimination in technology 
development.  Supporting digital solutions that promote and advance equality 
and non -discrimination.  
● Applying accessibility standards for persons with disabilities in digit al and 
technological solutions to ensure their equal access.  
Inclusive  ● Building digital literacy with a focus on delivering programs to underserved 
areas/populations, in the public education system, and offering skilling 
programs that enable individuals to adapt to rapidly evolving technology.  
● Emphasizing digital policies wh ich give special consideration to those who 
face particular difficulties in accessing or reaping the benefits of digital 
inclusion. This includes marginalised or vulnerable populations and persons 
with disabilities.  
Safe ● Acknowledge gaps in internet acce ss and digital skills as security concerns 
since they are as factors that create differential vulnerabilities to cyber -
attacks.  
● Providing and supporting training in digital security and safety with an 
emphasis on women, girls, persons with disabilities, s exual and gender 
minorities, and persons that are marginalized or in vulnerable situations.  
● Increasing accountability for discrimination, violence and misleading content 
of internet service providers and other relevant technology partners.  
● Protecting personal data and privacy.  
● Addressing online gender -based violence as a serious threat to gender 
equality and safety as well as democracy. Women and girls, and especially 
those who face greater risk for multiple and intersecting forms of 
discrim ination, are the primary targets of online violence and abuse, which 
push them out of public participation.  
Meaningful  ● Ensuring full and meaningful use and development of the internet that meets 
the needs and interests of all, including persons with disabilities and persons 
or groups that are marginalised or in vulnerable situations.  
● Supporting the creation of content in local languages and ensuring content 
represents a country’s diverse communities, meets local needs, and 
preserves local knowledge.  
Human 
rights -
respecting  ● Adopting human rights -based approaches to access is an important enabler 
of digital inclusion that b oth encourages open dialogue online while providing 
safeguards for vulnerable populations.  
● Developing policies and systems that are rooted in international human rights 
standards towards promoting and creating safe, secure, inclusive, and open 
spaces onli ne and deterring actions that impact Internet use, such as human 
rights violations, online abuse, censorship, surveillance and other methods 
that limit individuals’ ability to exercise their human rights and fundamental 
freedoms.  
● Promote trustworthy and hu man-rights based artificial intelligence and 
promote our digital commons as a global public good.  
 
 
 
9 
  2. Avoid internet fragmentation  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
● Free9, open, interoperable,  reliable, and secure Internet.10 
 
KEY COMMITMENTS, PLEDGES, AND ACTIONS       
 
Shutdowns and state -sponsored network disruptions may silence political opposition, limit peaceful 
protests and prevent human rights defenders from documenting abuses. Moreover, arbitrary network 
disruptions are  inconsistent with the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals, undermine the 
economic benefits of the Internet and disrupt access to essential services such as health care.11 
 
Blocking, filtering, or shutting down the Internet suppresses the right of  peaceful assembly and 
freedoms of association and expression; eroding civic space; reinforcing a continued climate of 
economic uncertainty; disrupting access to healthcare, emergency services, and financial services; 
preventing payments for salaries, util ities, and education; and limiting the ability of journalists, human 
rights defenders, and others to report on and document human rights violations or abuses that are 
taking place during Internet shutdowns, or communications disruptions. 12 
 
This section refers to key commitments, pledges, and calls to action outlined in several FOC joint 
statements and underpinning documents:  
 
Joint Statement on Freedom of Expression Online13  
 
● All governments should immediately end Internet shutdowns and to refrain from content 
restrictions or actions that restrict civic space online and offline, in violation of states’ 
obligations under international human rights law. All governments should act in a manner that 
ensures a free, open, interoperable, reliable a nd secure Internet, and fully respects human 
rights including the freedom of expression.  
 
The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online14 
 
● Emphasize the need to overcome multiple, persistent digital divides, including the gender 
digital divide, and push back against the fragmentation of the global Internet.  
 
10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration15 
 
● We will redouble our efforts in working together for free, open, interopera ble, secure, and 
reliable Internet worldwide through taking action in speaking out against and countering 
Internet shutdowns, network disruptions and censorship that are inconsistent with 
international human rights law.  
 
Joint Statement on State Sponsored Network Disruptions16  
 
● Publically commit to maintain or develop human rights -respecting legislation that details the 
limited circumstances in which communication networks may be intentionally disrupted, 
 
9 Please note that the use of the word “free” does not refer to free in cost.  
10 Cited directly from the Freedom Online Coalition, The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online , 2022.   
11 Freed om Online Coalition, Joint Statement on Freedom of Expression Online , 2021.   
12 Freedom Online Coalition, Joint Statement o n Internet Shutdowns in Iran , 2022.  
13 In 2021, the FOC issued a joint statement on Freedom of Expression Online. Finland presented the statement on behalf of 
the FOC during the interactive dialogue on the annual report o f the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the 
right to freedom of opinion and expression at the 47th session of the United Nations Human Rights Council.  
14 In 2022, the FOC adopted the Ottawa Agenda, which provides a set of recommendation s for freedom online to reflect the 
evolution of the Coalition’s vision and scope of work since its inception in 2011. The recommendations were developed with 
input from FOC Members, Advisory Network representatives, and external stakeholders through domestic consultations in 
Canada and regional consultations held in North America, Latin America, Europe, Middle East & Nort h Africa, Sub -Saharan 
Africa, and the Asia -Pacific.  
15 Freedom Online Coalition, FOC 10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration , 2021 .  
16 In 2017, the FOC issued a joint statement  expressing deep concern over the growing trend of intentional state -sponsored 
disruptions of access to or dissemination of information online.   
 
10 
  consistent with Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Politi cal Rights (ICCPR) 
in this regard. The members of the Freedom Online Coalition are committed to respecting the 
human rights and fundamental freedoms proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and ICCPR, reaffirming that everyone has the right of peaceful assembly and to the 
freedoms of association, opinion, and expression. This includes the right to hold opinions 
without interference and the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all 
kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through 
any other media of one’s choice.  
 
● Improve transparency in national governments’ regulatory, judicial, and law enforcement 
agencies. Governments can demonstrate their commitment to promoting an d protecting 
human rights online by taking steps to improve transparency regarding how and when 
governmental agencies may conduct network disruptions.  
 
● Include issues related to intentional network disruptions adversely affecting human rights in 
diplomati c activities, such as bilateral and multilateral engagements and negotiations. 
Governments can address the economic, social, and political risks of these sorts of network 
disruptions in bilateral and multilateral engagements, encouraging partners to refrai n from 
such intentional disruptions and developing effective, human rights -respecting laws, 
legislation, and regulations designed to protect human rights online.  
 
● Collaborate with Internet service providers (ISPs), mobile telephony operators, social media 
companies, and other stakeholders to promote policies and practices in line with the United 
Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs) regardi ng responses to 
government requests to disrupt Internet and mobile network services in order to stifle human 
rights. The FOC encourages governments to develop dialogues with Internet stakeholders to 
discuss how to promote and protect human rights online, i ncluding issues around such 
network disruptions.  
 
● Issue public statements that highlight such instances of network disruptions and coordination; 
coordinate through embassies in the countries where such network disruptions are taking 
place to jointly urge governments to refrain from and cease such measures.  
 
Joint Statement on Internet Shutdowns in Iran17 
 
● Respect human rights obligations, including under articles 19, 21, 22 of the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  
 
Joint Statement on Restrictions on Access to Social Media18  
 
● Restrictions on content or links shared via social media sites are only permissible in 
accordance with Inter national human rights law, in particular Article 19(3) of the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Such legal provisions should be established pursuant 
to democratic processes, narrowly tailored, and enforced with appropriate transparency.  
 
● The Freedom Online Coalition strongly condemns restrictions in violation of human rights law 
of content shared via social media, and in particular the wholesale blocking of social media 
sites, to restrict individuals from exercising their human rights on line. We also note with 
concern efforts by states to use third -parties to impermissibly restrict access to content or 
undermine the security and stability of social media sites. Equally troubling are instances 
where national security or public order is evo ked as pretext to block social media.  
 
● As stated in the Freedom Online Coalition’s “Tallinn Agenda”, we call upon governments 
worldwide to promote transparency and independent, effective domestic oversight related to 
electronic surveillance, use of conten t take -down notices, limitations or restrictions on online 
content or user access and other similar measures, while committing ourselves to do the 
same.  
 
17 In 2022, the FOC issued a joint statement  condemning the measures undertaken to restrict access to the Internet in Iran.  
18 In 2014, the FOC issued a joint statement  on restrictions on access to social media, where it expressed concern at the 
blocking of social media sites and the use of third -parties to restrict access to content in violation of international law.  
 
11 
   
3. Protect data  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
● Personal data should be protected by reasonable security safeguards against security and 
privacy risks.19  
 
● Governments should refrain from restricting transborder flows of personal data between their 
own and another country where sufficient safeguards exist.20  
 
KEY COMMITMENTS, PLEDGES, AND ACTIONS        
 
This section refers to key commitments, pledges, and calls to action outlined in several FOC joint 
statements and underpinning documents:  
 
Joint Statement on Restrictive Data Localisation Laws21 
 
● The Coalition recognizes that governments may decide that certain data they hold or are 
responsible for must be stored on servers within their national borders, as one aspect of a 
comprehensive, secure information management policy.  
 
● The Freedom Online Co alition members support an open and interoperable Internet, as 
reaffirmed in the “Tallinn Agenda,” as well as in the NETmundial Principles and the OECD 
Guidelines Governing the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data, and 
the Coalition  calls on all States to do the same.  
 
● The Coalition invites companies, when required by laws or regulations to store data locally, to 
conduct appropriate human rights due diligence consistent with the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights.  
 
Joint Statement on the Use and Export of Surveillance Technology22  
 
● The Coalition notes that, as reflected in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, companies, including those that market and provide surveillance technology, have 
human right -related responsibilities. The Coalition recalls the expectation t hat such 
companies uphold these responsibilities, including by implementing appropriate systems and 
policies and conducting human rights due -diligence with regard to the provision of 
surveillance technology and related services.  
 
  
 
19 Cited directly from the FOC’s 2015 joint statement  on restrictive data localisati on laws.  
20 Cited  directly from the FOC’s 2015 joint statement  on restrictive dat a localisation laws.  
21 In 2015, the FOC issued a joint statement  on restrictive  data localisation laws. It expresses concern regarding the use of 
privacy and security considerations by authoritarian governments as a pretext to force Internet companies and service 
providers to store user data on servers physically located within their  domestic borders.  
22 In 2014, the FOC issued a joint statement  on the use and export of surveillance technology.  
 
12 
  4. Apply human rights online  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
● Commit to respect, protect, and fulfil human rights for all, both online and offline.23 
 
● Strengthen internet infrastructure.24 
 
● Reaffirm support for a free, open, interoperable, reliable and secure internet, noting that 
strong cyber security and secure and stable communication are critical to maintaining 
confidence and trust in the internet, and key to safeguarding human rights and realising the 
internet’s economic, social and cultural benefits.25 
 
● Support expanded connec tivity  to a free, open, interoperable, reliable, and secure  global 
internet where the rights that all persons have offline are protected online, including the 
freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas.26 
 
● Improve transparency and account ability.27  
 
● Ensure robust, diverse, inclusive, and protected civic participation online and offline.28 
 
● Commit to inclusive and open multi -stakeholder governance of digital technologies, including 
the Internet, and to sustained dialogue with external stak eholders to share knowledge and 
expertise.29 
 
KEY COMMITMENTS, PLEDGES, AND ACTIONS   
 
The Freedom Online Coalition believes that the human rights and fundamental freedoms that 
individuals have offline must also be protected online. We are committed to working together to 
support Internet freedom for individuals worldwide –including the freedoms of expression, association, 
peaceful assembly, as well as privacy rights online.     
 
This section refers to key commitments, pledges, and calls to action outlined in several FOC joint 
statements and underpinning documents:  
 
Tallinn Agenda30  
   
● States should collectively condemn – through diplomatic channels, public statements, and 
other means — violations and abuses of human rights and fundamental freedoms online, as 
they occur in different c ountries throughout the world.  
 
● States should halt imprisonment, harassment, physical violence, censorship, hacking as well 
as illicit filtering, blocking and monitoring of opposition voices and other repressive measures 
used to restrict freedom of expres sion and organisation online in contravention of international 
human rights obligations.  
 
10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration31 
 
● States should unequivocally condemn the use of digital technologies for repressive and 
authoritarian purposes, through actions such as internet shutdowns and  network disruptions 
 
23 Cited directly from the Freedom Online Coalition, The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online , 2022.   
24 Freedom Online Coalition, Joint Statement on State -Sponsored Network Disruptions , 2017.   
25 Freedom Online Coalition, Tallinn Agenda , 2014.  
26 Freedom Online Coalition , Task Force on Internet Shutdowns, Resources and Best Practices for Diplomatic Engagement on 
Internet Shutdowns , 2022, (available only to FOC members).   
27 Freedom Online Coalition, Joint Statement on State -Sponsored Network Disruptions , 2017.   
28 Freedom Online Coalition, Joint Statement on Defending Civic Space Online , 2019.  
29 Cited directly from the Freedom Online Coalition, The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online , 2022.   
30 In 20 14, the Freedom Online Coalition issued the Tallinn Agenda . The FOC issued recent amendments to the Freedom  
Online Coalition Stockholm Terms of Reference to include country -specific statements, 2022.    
31 Freedom Online Coalition, 10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration , 2021.  
 
13 
  inconsistent with international human rights law.   
 
● States, the private sector, and civil society shall coordinate rights -respecting advocacy on 
internet shutdowns and monitor ongoing technical, economic, legal, and human rights 
conce rns regarding the use of internet shutdowns by states, especially in the context of 
elections, protests, and ongoing health and humanitarian crises;32  
 
The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online33 
 
● States, the private sector, and civil society should adopt holistic and interoperable approaches 
to countering internet fragmentation and work towards overcoming digital divides, advocating 
for ubiquitous, secure, affordable, equitable, and high -quality co nnectivity, free from threats 
such as censorship and State -sponsored internet shutdowns ensuring groups in vulnerable 
circumstances or who are marginalized or disenfranchised or otherwise discriminated against 
by the state or others, can fully realize thei r human rights online.   
 
Joint Statement on State -Sponsored Networ k Disruptions34 
 
● States, as well as the private sector, should work to improve and increase transparency. 
States can demonstrate their commitment to promoting and protecting human rights online by 
taking steps to improve  transparency in accordance with international human rights law.  
 
● States should include internet shutdowns adversely affecting human rights in diplomatic 
activities, such as bilateral and multilateral engagements and negotiations. States can 
specifically address the economic, social, and political risks of these sorts of network 
disruptions in bilateral and multilateral engagements, encouraging partners to refrain from 
such intentional disruptions and developing effective, human rights -respecting laws, 
legislation, and regulations designed to protect human rights online.   
   
● States, internet service providers (ISPs), mobile telephone operators, social media 
companies, and civil society should collaborate to promote policies and practices in line with 
the U nited Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights regarding responses to 
government requests to disrupt internet and mobile network services in order to stifle human 
rights. The FOC encourages States to develop dialogues with all stakeholders t o discuss how 
to promote and protect human rights online, including issues such as internet shutdowns.   
 
Resources and Best Practices for Diplomatic Engagement on Internet Shutdowns35 
Please note that the views of the Task Force on Internet Shutdown (TFIS) do not necessarily 
reflect the opinions of the full FOC membership.  
 
The Freedom Online Coalition (FOC) Task Force on Internet Shutdowns (TFIS) drafted the 
following key commitments. Launched in December 2021,  the FOC TFIS is a multinational and 
multistakeholder coordination and response mechanism on internet shutdowns. Th e Task Force 
works to improve coordination among like -minded countries, civil society, and the private sector to 
anticipate and respond to internet shutdowns. Their  work, including this submission, builds on the 
FOC’s 2017 Joint Statement and accompanying Good Practices for Governments on State 
Sponsored Network Disruptions and the 2021 G7 Leaders’ Communique and Foreign and 
Development Ministers Communique.  
 
Internet shutdowns imposed by governments impact all people, especially those who may be in 
vulner able situations, such as women. Internet shutdowns ramp up censorship, restrict free 
 
32 Freedom Online Coalition, 10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration , 2021.  
33 In 2022, the FOC adopted the Ottawa Agenda, which provides a set of recommendations for freedom online to reflect the 
evolution of the Coalition’s vision and scope of work since its inception in 2011. The recommendations were developed with 
input from FOC Members, Advisory Network representatives, and external stakeholders through domestic consultations in 
Canada and regional consultations held in North America, Latin America, Europe, Middle East & North Africa, Sub -Saharan 
Africa, and the Asia -Pacific.  
34  Freedom Online Coalition,  Joint Statement on State -Spons ored Network Disruptions , 2017.  
35 Freedom Online Coalition, Task Force on Internet Shutdowns, Resources and Best Practices for Diplomatic Engagement on 
Internet Shutdowns , 2022, (available only to FOC members).   
 
14 
  expression, and limit the dissemination and free flow of information, contributing to social and 
political disorder, and violence and negatively affecting public safety. A ccording to Access Now 
and the #KeepItOn coalition — composed of more than 300 organizations from 105 countries — in 
2022 the internet was shut down 187 times in 35 countries. Combating internet shutdowns, 
therefore, remains a key priority for the internat ional community and has been notably featured in 
the UN Secretary -General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation ( A/74/821 ); and the former UN High 
Commissioner for Human Rights’ Human Rights Council report on Internet Shutdowns 
(A/HRC/ 50/55 ). Overall, internet shutdowns interfere with a range of fundamental human rights. As 
such, internet shutdowns hinder international goals for an “open, free and secure digital future for 
all” and to accelerate the r ealization of the 2030 Agenda as captured in the UN Declaration on the 
Commemoration of the 75th Anniversary of the UN.  
  
● States should specifically condemn government use of internet shutdowns, network 
restrictions, or other measures intended to disrupt individuals’ ability to access and 
disseminate information and to communicate safely and securely. This includes arbitrary 
interference with encryption and anonymity tools.   
  
● States, the private sector, and civil society shall share information on internet shutdowns 
rapidly as they occur, and facilitate additional information -sharing between stakeholders.  
 
● States, the priva te sector and civil society should support and implement the 
recommendations in the UN Human Rights Council Report of the UN High Commissioner 
for Human Rights, “Internet shutdowns: trends, causes, legal implications and impacts on 
a range of human rights. ” 
  
● States should avoid shutting down, blocking, or throttling internet, telecommunication, 
and/or mobile services. Doing so can violate a range of human rights, including freedoms 
of expression and opinion, peaceful assembly, and association. These action s also disrupt 
access to essential services such as healthcare and emergency services and harm the 
economy.  
 
    
Joint Statement on Digital Inclusion36  
 
● States and the private sector, in consultation with civil society, should ensure to safeguard 
human rights and fundamental freedoms online, and to implement and share such best 
practices on issues pertaining to internet shutdowns, bridging digital divides, especially in 
support of community networks, and enabling  digital inclusion, and States should play a 
supportive role in facilitating this.   
 
● Civil society organizations should be supported in their efforts to address barriers and 
bottlenecks to digital access, cybersecurity risks, and on how to develop policy that drives 
positive outcomes related to the improved access and use of digital technologies.  
 
Joint Statement on COVID -19 and Internet Freedom37 
 
In response to the COVID -19 pandemic, we call upon governments worldwide:    
 
● States should immediately end internet shutdowns, and ensure the broadest possible access 
to online services by taking steps to bridge digital divides.  
     
 
36 In 2020, the FOC adopted a joint statement  on digit al inclusion, which recognizes the importance of meaningful digital 
inclusion in enabling people to exercise their human rights more fully, but also acknowledges that digital inclusion poses bo th 
collateral opportunities and risks. The statement builds on a number of other commitments to promote digital equality, with 
initiatives to overcome various digital divides having been launched by a plethora of stakeholders, from civil society 
organisations to the private sector; governments; and various UN organisa tions tasked with working towards the SDGs.  
37 In 2020, the FOC issued a joint statement  on COVID -19 and Internet freedom. The statement expresses concern about the 
human rights implications of certain measures introduced by governments in response to the COVID -19 crisis, such as the use 
of arbitrary or unlawful surveillance practices, net work shutdowns, and censorship.  
 
15 
  ● To refrain from adopting or implementing laws and policies that may negatively affect the 
enjoymen t of human rights, or that unreasonably restrict civic space online and offline, in 
violation of states’ obligations under international human rights law.  
 
● To promote an enabling environment for free expression and access to information online to 
protect privacy and to refrain from content restrictions that violate international human rights 
law.  
 
● To take appropriate measures to counter violence, intimidation, threats and attacks against 
individuals and groups, including human rights defenders, on the Int ernet and through digital 
technologies  
 
Joint Statement on the Human Rights Impact of Cybersecurity Laws, Practices, and Po licies  
 
● States need to comply with their obligations under international human rights law when 
considering, developing and applying national cybersecurity policies and legislation.  
 
● States need to develop and implement c ybersecurity -related laws, policies and practices in a 
manner consistent with international human rights law, and seek to minimise potential 
negative impacts on vulnerable groups and civil society, including human rights defenders 
and journalists. This inc ludes building, where appropriate, supporting processes and 
frameworks for transparency, accountability, judicial or other forms of independent and 
effective oversight, and redress towards building trust. It may also include embedding the 
principles of leg itimacy, legality, necessity or proportionality into policy and practice.  
 
● States should promote international cooperation on cyber issues that focuses on protecting 
and upholding human rights in order to build mutual trust between all stakeholders.  
  
  
 
16 
  4. Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
● Advocate for a global, free38, open, interoperable, secure and reliable Internet.39 
 
● Public access to factual and diverse information, which can make societies more resilient to 
disinformation.40  
 
● News and media ecosystem where there is access to information and plurality of media; free 
and independent media has a sustainable future; and public service media and local news 
outlets are able to thrive.41 
 
KEY COMMITMENTS, PLEDGES, AND ACTIONS   
 
This section refers to key commitments, pledges, and calls to action outlined in several FOC joint 
statements and underpinning documents:  
 
The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online  
 
● Engage in dialogue and cooperation with the private sector to address risks relating to digital 
transformation, such as disinformation, and  committing to developing rules of the road for 
addressing information integrity online.  
 
10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration  
 
● We will foster multi -stakeholder cooperation to address both hate speech, and disinformation 
in a manner that respects human rights, democracy and the rule of law. 
 
● We will redouble our efforts in working together for free, open, interoperable, secure, and 
reliable Internet worldwide through addressing disinformation and other harmful content 
online and ensuring that any measures are in accordance with internati onal law, including 
international human rights law.  
 
Joint Statement on the Spread of Disinformation Online42 
 
The FOC calls on government s to:  
 
● Abstain from conducting and sponsoring disinformation campaigns, and condemn such acts.  
 
● Address disinformation while ensuring a free, open, interoperable, reliable and secure 
Internet, and fully respecting human rights.  
 
● Improve coordination and multi -stakeholder cooperation, including with the private sector and 
civil society, to address disinformation in a manner that respects human rights, democracy 
and the rule of law.  
 
● Implement any measures, including legislation in troduced to address disinformation, in a 
manner that complies with international human rights law and does not lead to restrictions on 
freedom of opinion and expression inconsistent with Article 19 of the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Right s.  
 
 
38 Please note that the use of the word “free” does not refer to free in cost.  
39 Cited directly from the Freedom Online Coalition, The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online , 2022.   
40 Freedom Online Coalition, Joint Statement on the Spread of Disinformation , 2020.  
41 Freedom Online Coalition, Joint Statement on the Spread of Disinformation , 2020.  
42 In 2020, the FOC issued a  joint statement  expressing deep concern about the growing scope and sophistication of 
disinformation, which has been employed by state and non -state actors with political, ideological, commercial or other motives.  
 
17 
  ● Respect, protect and fulfill the right to freedom of expression, including freedom to seek, 
receive and impart information regardless of frontiers, taking into account the important and 
valuable guidance of human rights treaty bodies  
 
● Refrain from di screditing criticism of their policies and stifling freedom of opinion and 
expression under the guise of countering disinformation, including blocking access to the 
Internet, intimidating journalists and interfering with their ability to operate freely.  
 
● Support initiatives to empower individuals through online media and digital literacy education 
to think critically about the information they are consuming and sharing, and take steps to 
keep themselves and others safe online.  
 
● Take active steps to addres s disinformation targeted at vulnerable groups, acknowledging, in 
particular the specific targeting of and impact on women and persons belonging to minorities.  
 
● Support international cooperation and partnerships to promote digital inclusion, including 
universal and affordable access to the Internet for all.  
 
The FOC urges social media platforms and the private sector to:  
 
● Address disinformation in a manner that is guided by respect for human rights and the UN 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.  
 
● Increase transparency into the factors considered by algorithms to curate content feeds and 
search query results, fo rmulate targeted advertising, and establish policies around political 
advertising, so that researchers and civil society can identify related implications.  
 
● Increase transparency around measures taken to address the problems algorithms can cause 
in the co ntext of disinformation, including content take down, account deactivation and other 
restrictions and algorithmic alterations. This may include building appropriate mechanisms for 
reporting, designed in a multi -stakeholder process and without compromising effectiveness or 
trade secrets.  
 
● Promote users’ access to meaningful and timely appeal processes to any decisions taken in 
regard to the removal of accounts or content.  
 
● Respect the rule of law across the societies in which they operate, while ensuring n ot to 
contribute to violations or abuses of human rights.  
 
● Use independent and impartial fact -checking services to help identify and highlight 
disinformation, and take measures to strengthen the provision of independent news sources 
and content on their p latforms.  
 
● Support research by working with governments, civil society and academia and, where 
appropriate, enabling access to relevant data on reporting, appeal and approval processes, 
while ensuring respect for international human rights law .  
 
The FOC urges civil society and academia to:  
 
● Continue research into the nature, scale and impact of online disinformation, as well as 
strategic level analysis to inform public debate and government action.  
 
● Adequately consider the impact of disinformation on women and marginalized groups who are 
targeted by disinformation campaigns in this research.  
 
● Engage with the private sector and governments to share findings and collaborate on 
research, whilst ensuring appropriate privacy protections are in place.  
 
 
18 
  ● Actively participate in public debate and in  multi -stakeholder initiatives looking to address 
disinformation and emphasize the necessity of evidence -based discussion.   
 
19 
  6. Regulation of artificial intelligence  
CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
● Promotion and protection of human rights, democracy, and the rule of law in the design, 
development, procurement, and use of AI systems.43 
 
● Transparency and accountability.44 
 
● Work with the private sector, civil society, academia, and other relevant stakeholders.45 
 
● Abide by obligations under international human rights law to ensure that human rights are 
fully respected and protected.46 
 
KEY COMMITMENTS, PLEDGES, AND ACTIONS        
 
This section refers to key commitments, pledges, and calls to action outlined in several FOC joint 
statements and underpinning docume nts:  
 
Joint Statement on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights47 
 
● States should take action to oppose and refrain from the use of AI systems for repressive and 
authoritarian purposes in violation of international human rights law.  
 
● States should refrain from arbitrary or unlawful interference in the operations of online 
platforms, including those using AI systems, and they should refrain from excessive use of 
national security reasons as justification for cases of interference.48 
 
● States should promote international multi -stakeholder engagement in the development of 
relevant norms, rules, and standards for the design, development, procurement, use, 
certification, and governance of AI systems that, at a minimum, are consistent with 
international human rights law.  
 
● States shall ensure that the design, development and use of AI systems in the public sector is 
conducted in accordance with their international human rights obligations.  
 
● States, and any private sector or civil society actors working with them or on their behalf, 
should protect human rights when procuring, designing, developing and using AI systems in 
the public sector, through the adoption of processes such as due diligence and independent 
impact assessments, that are made transparent and participatory wherever possible.  
 
● States shoul d encourage the private sector to observe principles and practices of responsible 
business conduct (RBC) in the use of AI systems throughout their operations and supply and 
 
43 Cited  directly from the 2020 FOC joint statement  on artificial intelligence (AI) and human rights.  
44 Cited  directly from the 20 20 FOC joint statement  on artificial intelligence (AI) and human rights.  
45 Cited  from the 2020 FOC joint statement  on artificial intelligence (AI) and human rights.  
46 Cited  directly from the 2020 FOC joint statement  on artificial intelligence (AI) and human rights.  
47 In 2020,  the FOC issued a joint statement  on artificial intelligence (AI) and huma n rights. The FOC called upon governments 
to oppose and refrain from the use of AI systems for repressive and authoritarian purposes; to ensure the design, development  
and use of AI systems in the public sector is conducted in accordance with international  human rights obligations; and to 
promote, where appropriate, support efforts by the private sector, civil society, and all other relevant stakeholders to incr ease 
transparency and accountability related to the use of AI systems.  
48 Note from the Task Forc e on Artificial Intelligence: “States have a responsibility to ensure that any measures affecting online 
platforms, including counter -terrorism and national security legislation, are consistent with international law, including 
international human rights l aw. They should refrain from restrictions on the right to freedom of information, of opinion and 
expression, and the right to peaceful assembly and association, including in relation to political dissent and the work of 
journalists, civil society, and huma n rights defenders, except when such restrictions are in accordance with international law, 
particularly international human rights law.”  
 
 
20 
  value chains, in a consistent manner and across all contexts.49 
 
● States should consider how domestic legislation, regulation and policies can identify, prevent, 
and mitigate risks to human rights posed by the design, development and use of AI systems, 
and take action where appropriate.50 
 
● States should promote and, where appro priate, support efforts by the private sector, civil 
society, and all other relevant stakeholders to increase transparency and accountability 
related to the use of AI systems on topics such as the following:  
o user privacy, including the use of user data to refine AI systems, the sharing of data 
collected through AI systems with third parties, and if reasonable, how to opt -out of 
the collection, sharing, or use of user -generated data;  
o the automated moderation of user generated content including, but not limit ed to, the 
removal, downranking, flagging, and demonetization of content;  
o recourse or appeal mechanisms, when content is removed as the result of an 
automated decision;  
o oversight mechanisms, such as human monitoring for potential human rights impact.  
 
● States, as well as the private sector, should work towards increased transparency while 
safeguarding privacy and intellectual property rights, in order to facilitate collaborative and 
independent research into AI systems and their potential impacts on huma n rights.  
 
● States should foster education about AI systems and possible impacts on human rights 
among the public and stakeholders, including product developers and policy -makers.  
 
10th Anniversary Helsinki Declaration  
 
● The application of digital technologies that involve facial recognition and massive collection of 
personal data have been used for political repression and economic exploitation. State and 
non-state actors should immediately cease actions incompatible with international human 
rights. We encourage the private sector  to promote and increase non -discrimination, 
transparency, traceability, and accountability in the design, development, procurement, 
dissemination and use of digital technologies, with appropriate protections for intellectual 
property.  
 
Contribution from the FOC Task Force on Artificial Intelligence  and Human Rights    
Please note that the views of the Task Force on AI and Human Rights do not necessarily reflect 
the opinions of the full FOC membership.  
 
The Freedom Online Coalition’s Task Force on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights drafted the 
following key recommendations:  
 
● The private sector should increase exchange among each other and with academia and 
independent experts on how algorithms in search engines are designed, and should make 
efforts to streamline their criteria in content moderat ion of search engines also abiding by 
human rights principles; the private sector should increase transparency on the content 
moderation mechanisms applied by search engines towards private consumers.  
 
 
49 Note from the Task Force on Artificial Intelligence: “By incorporating RBC, companies are better equipped to manage  risks, 
identify and resolve issues proactively, and adapt operations accordingly for long -term success. RBC activities of both states 
and the private sector should be in line with international frameworks such as the UN Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights and the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.”  
50 Note from the Task Force on Artificial Intelligence: “These may include national AI and data strategies, human rights codes, 
privacy laws, data protection measures, responsible business practices, and other measures that may protect the interests of 
persons or groups facing multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination. National measures should take into consideration 
such guidance provided by human rights treaty bodies and international initiatives, such as human -centered values identified in 
the OECD Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence, which was also endorsed by the G20 AI Principles. States 
should promote the meaningful inclusion of persons  or groups who can be disproportionately and negatively impacted, as well 
as civil society and academia, in determining if and how AI systems should be used in different contexts (weighing potential 
benefits against potential human rights impacts and devel oping adequate safeguards).”  
 
21 
  ● The private sector should develop mechanisms in order to avoid that new and emerging 
technologies rely, throughout their entire life cycle, on datasets, algorithms -based 
programming and machine learning processes that can reproduce and exacerbate existing 
patterns of structural discriminat ion, marginalization, social inequalities, stereotypes and 
biases.  
 
● Civil society stakeholders should put efforts into raising awareness and increasing 
understanding among the general public about the potential impact of AI technologies on 
Human rights, an d support civil societies in strengthening their resilience in that regard. 
Companies and governments should ensure that civil society and non -company 
stakeholders are allowed relevant and updated information to carry out their public 
awareness role.  
 
 
Contribution from the FOC Silicon Valley Working Group51 
Please note that the views of the Silicon Valley Working Group  do not necessarily reflect the 
opinions of the full FOC membership.  
 
The Freedom Online Coalition’s Task Force Silicon Valley Working Group drafted the following key 
recommendations:   
 
• We encourage companies operating in the technology sector and all comp anies working 
with new and emerging digital technologies to undertake the following commitments. 
Pledges, and actions under the UN Global Digital Compact:  
 
• Act to apply and ensure compliance of their activities with the UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights (UNGPs), including by leveraging guidance available via the 
B-Tech Project of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.  
 
• Commit to enhancing co -literacy and participating in regular open dialogue and 
consultation with the international community, including governments, academia, and civil 
society organizations, on concerns around the implications of new and emerging digital 
technol ogies and human rights.  
 
• Act to provide access to governments, researchers and other relevant stakeholders to data 
and algorithms that may be needed to successfully develop, implement and evaluate 
recommended policies and regulatory actions.  
• Act to uphold and expand enjoyment of human rights online by taking measures to counter 
disinformation, enhance cybersecurity, develop trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) and 
expand digital inclusion.  
 
• Act to ensure that private sector led regulatory  frameworks and technical standard -setting 
processes integrate recognition of and compliance with international human rights 
obligations.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
51 The Silicon Valley Working Group (SVWG) was launched in 2021 with the aim to build new forms of cooperation between the 
FOC and the global tech sector, whose products or services potentially impact human rights.  
 
22 
  Any other comments on the Global Digital Compact?  
 
Meaningful Multi -Stakeholder Engagement  
“We the members of the Freedom Online Coalition underline the importance of multi -stakeholder 
co-operation, including governments, international organizations, civil society, private sector, 
academia, media, the technical community, and other relevant stakeholders, advocating for the 
development and use of digital technologies in ways that protect and reinforce democracy, hu man 
rights and the rule of law. We c ommit to inclusive and open multi -stakeholder governanc e of digital 
technologies, including the Internet, and to sustained dialogue with external stakeholders to share 
knowledge a nd expertise. ”52  
 
 
From the Joint Statement of the FOC Presented at the 29th Session of the United Nations Human 
Rights Council:  
 
“The Coalition recognizes the need to actively engage with all relevant stakeholders, including 
governments, businesses, civil society, academics and other experts, in protecting and promoting 
human rights and fundamental freedoms online, and und erlines its commitment to continuously 
work together in a multi -stakeholder process to further Internet freedom globally.”  
 
  
Would you like to be included on the email list for updates on future developments on the Global 
Digital Compact? If so, please include the specific emails to be added.  
No 
Yes (supportunit@freedomonlinecoalition.com)   
 
Would you like to submit additional documentation in support of the information you have provided 
in this survey?  
Yes  
No 
 
 
 
52 Cited dire ctly from the Freedom Online Coalition, The Ottawa Agenda: Recommendations for Freedom Online , 2022.   