 
 
 
KASPERSKY SUBMISSION TO THE GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
(APRIL 2023)  
 
Kaspersky firmly welcomes efforts by the UN Secretary General to promote the 
concept of global digital commons and considers the Global Digital Compact 
initiative to be  an important step in fostering digitalization worldwide.  
As information and communications technologies play an increasingly important 
role in the daily  lives of billions of people, they bring great benefits . Unfortunately,  
they also pose growing risks to individuals. And one of the best ways to mitigate 
these risks is to increase the level of cybersecurity awareness among users 
throughout  the world , with particular attention paid to educating women and 
children, as they  are usually  the ones  facing greater threats on the Internet.  
As a leading provider of cybersecurity solutions and services, Kaspersky ’s most 
important  mission is to protect users and companies from cyberthreats of any origin. 
We believe that building cybersecurity is vital in ensuring  safe access to digital 
commons. That is why, for more than  20 years, we have been cooperating  with 
universities, government authorities and non -government expert organizations in the 
area of cybersecurity education.  
Kaspersky’s contribution to the Global Digital Compact  is based on its vast 
experience and exper tise in promoting cybersecurity literacy worldwide, and 
includ es projects involving multi lateral cooperation . Our ultimate goal is to provid e 
global access to high -quality IT and cybersecurity courses to all interested 
individuals  and organizations.  
 
Focus: Digital Commons as a global public good  
 
Core Principles for Governments, International Organizations, Businesses 
Universities and Other Relevant Stakeholders  
 
1. Raising the  Level of Cybersecurity Literacy : While access to information 
technolog y provides plenty of opportunities, it also presents substantial threats 
which are usually hidden from unprepared users. In this regard, a high-quality 
affordable cybersecurity awareness program is essential, as it can help people 
2 
 
 
worldwide  enjoy the digital realm  with an  aware ness of its dangers , enabling 
them to avoid the risks posed by the Internet.  
2. Promoting Digital Inclusivity : Everyone, regardless of their gender, age , and 
ethnicity, should be able to participate and benefit from the digital economy. 
Consequently, both governmental and non -governmental (universities, 
businesses etc.) stakeholders should aim their cyber capacity building 
initiatives to bridg e the d igital gap and provid e equal opportunities in 
cyberspace for all.  
3. Building a Skilled Workforce : Efficient cybersecurity requires thousands of 
highly qualified professionals. As a result, growing investments are needed in 
comprehensive training programs in cybersecurity, ethical hacking and digital 
forensics. The focus should be on state -supported educational initiatives – 
especially in developing countries  - in order to bridge the dangerous gap 
between the level of digitalization and the number  of skilled cybersecurity 
professionals in the market.  
4. Cyber Hygiene for Everyone : As digital technologies constitute an 
important part of everyday life, cyber skills become essential not just for IT 
specialists , but for everybody. In this regard, cybersecurity awareness should 
be an integral part of school and university education as well as at work  with 
training courses . Involvement in developing and promoting educational 
programs should be an intrinsic  component of the social responsibility of ICT 
vendors and technological leaders.  
5. Enhancing International Cooperation : While providing access to the digital 
world, governments as well as non -state actors (including ICT vendors) 
should bear in mind importance  of cybersecurity. And, as cyberthreats are of 
global nature, wide international cooperation under an estab lished framework 
is required that will involve all interested parties, including private sector.  
6. Fostering Public -Private Partnerships : Cooperation between the public and 
private sectors will allow for the  pooling of resources, expertise, and 
technolog y to strengthen cyber capacity and counter cyber threats.  
 
Key Actions  
Cybersecurity education as well as raising public awareness of basic rules of staying 
safe online should be a priorit y for every  organization  that deal s with the creation of 
a digital world. In order to reach these objectives, Kaspersky  is putting great deal of  
effort into developing the following projects:  
3 
 
 
1. Cyber Capacity Building Program . This initiative is aimed at the public 
sector, universities as well as small and medium businesses in order to help 
them develop mechanisms and skills for security assessments of the ICT 
products they use.  
2. Kaspersky Academy . This initiative to improve the quality of cybersecurity -
related education was launched more t han a decade ago and unites universities 
from nearly 70 countries from different parts of the world. A large  number of 
projects, such as competitions and cybersecurity student communities, target 
students and teachers globally with no age restriction. Particular attention in 
the upcoming years will be paid towards cooperation with developing 
countries in Asia and  Africa.  
3. Cyber Resilience Project for kids . This initiative was launched  under the 
umbrella  of the Kaspersky Academy on March 20, 2023, in Singapore. The 
goal of this project is to promote a culture of holistic cyber resilience in and 
through education, thus empowering teachers and students to navigate the 
digital world safely and responsibly. Another n otable initiative, which is 
oriented to kids, is the publication of “Midori Kuma and a  Very Special 
Race” Book . Its aim is to inform children about online safety at a level 
suitable for them. The book is available in six languages: Arabic, English, 
German, Portuguese, Russian and Spanish.  
4. Coalition  Against Stalkerware . Back in 2019, Kaspersky was one of the 
founding members of this coalition which was created as a response to a 
growing number of individuals affected by digital stalking. The initiative 
unites both organizations that work to combat  domestic violence and the IT -
security community.  
 
 
Useful Resources  
• Kaspersky’s Sustainability Report for 2021 and the first half of 2022  
• Kaspersky.Academy  
• Coalition Against Stalkerware  