Global Digital  
Compact Consultation
Joint submission by 43 
Child Rights Organisations
Under thematic area 4 “Apply Human Rights Online”
#SafeOnline 25 April 2023
Introduction
Together with five expert organizations (5 Rights Foundation, ECPAT International, International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), WeProtect Global Alliance and World Childhood Foundation Sweden) the 
End Violence Partnership has prepared a joint submission to advocate for the protection of children from 
online risks and harms to be meaningfully integrated across the Global Digital Compact . The consultation 
aims to inform the design of the Global Digital Compact that will outline ‘shared principles for an open, free 
and secure digital future for all’ to be agreed at the Summit of the Future in September 2024. 
We need to make sure children’s rights to protection online are taken into account in the global digital 
agenda. This joint submission brings together the expertise and voices of 43 child rights organizations and 
partners to outline critical principles and commitments key actors should follow to ensure the digital world is 
safe for children.
Core principles that all governments, companies, civil society organisations  
and other stakeholders should adhere to:
The implementation of children’s rights online along with the digital safety of children needs to be at 
the forefront of the Global Digital Compact across all its components. Digital technologies have created 
exceptional opportunities to advance the human condition including opportunities for children but have 
also created spaces for abuses at an unprecedented scale and with an increasingly profound impact on 
the health, wellbeing and future prospects of children of all ages and backgrounds. The rapid expansion of 
information and communication technology has created exceptional opportunities for children and young 
people to know their rights and access information as more and more children are connecting for the first 
time every day, either on personal or shared devices. However, wider and more easily available access 
to the Internet and digital technology also poses significant challenges to meaningful connectivity and 
children’s rights, including their safety. Impacts range from threats to protection of personal data and privacy, 
to harassment and cyberbullying, harmful online content, grooming for sexual purposes, and sexual abuse 
and exploitation.  
One of the worst unforeseen consequences of the rise of the internet and digital technologies has been the 
exponential growth in online child sexual exploitation and abuse (CSEA) which comes in many forms and 
includes grooming, live streaming, consuming child sexual abuse material, and coercing and blackmailing 
children for sexual purposes. Online CSEA can be interconnected with other forms of violence like gender-
based violence, stalking, bullying, cyber-aggression and cyber-harassment and trafficking. It violates 
children’s fundamental rights and may result in long-term harm for victims and survivors. 
The latest data shows that 15% of children reported cyberbullying victimization, and 11% of 9–16-year-old 
across 19 European countries had experienced misuse of their personal information or password, or theft of 
their digital identity. In the past year, fewer than 40% of children had come across websites where people 
talked about or displayed gory or violent images or had seen images of a sexual nature, and less than one 
quarter of children in surveyed countries said that they had seen online content related to physical self-
harm ( Annual report to the Human Rights Council  of the Special Representative of the Secretary General on 
Violence against Children, January 2023). 
The prevalence of online CSEA has already been highlighted as a “major concern” in the 2020 UN roadmap 
for digital cooperation. In the last two years this crime has continued to grow at exponential rates. In 2021, 
the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children  received 29.3 million reports of suspected child sexual 
exploitation (an increase of 35% from 2020). The multi-country research project Disrupting Harm shows 
that up to 20% of 12–17-year-olds across 13 countries were subjected to online CSEA in the past year alone; 
scaled to the general population of internet-using children, these estimates represent millions of children in 
each country. A scarcity of data remains on this crime, but available data shows that: victims of online CSEA 
1
2fall into all age groups, but they are increasingly getting younger; while girls seem to be more affected, for 
boys the abuse may be more severe; perpetrators are more likely to be someone the child already knows in 
person; online violence is often associated with experiences of in-person violence; and, it has devastating 
impact on children’s physical and mental health.
The Global Digital Compact should unite and lead the world to reverse this wave of online sexual 
abuse of children via applying children’s rights frameworks online and to frontier issues and new 
technologies. The UNCRC General Comment 25  adopted in March 2021, formally established children 
as rights holders in the digital environment, and noted that “States parties should take legislative and 
administrative measures to protect children from violence in the digital environment, including the regular 
review, updating and enforcement of robust legislative, regulatory and institutional frameworks that protect 
children from recognized and emerging risks of all forms of violence in the digital environment.” The World 
Economic Forum Global Principles on Digital Safety ( White paper , January 2023) highlights the need for 
(1) collaboration across stakeholders; (2) inclusive and informed decision-making; (3) evidence-based and 
innovative solutions to prevent risks and harms in digital environments; (4) transparency across all actors; 
(5) realization of digital rights of vulnerable and marginalized groups, including protecting children’s safety 
and privacy. Industry actors have also made some progress to create shared frameworks and principles to 
tackle this crime and better define their role. For example, in 2020 the Five Country Ministerial launched 
the Voluntary Principles to Counter Online Child Sexual Exploitation and Abuse  created in partnership 
with leading tech companies and WeProtect Global Alliance, and in 2022 the Tech Coalition launched the 
Voluntary Framework for Industry Transparency , led by industry partners following a consultation process 
with civil society and Governments. Such processes showed the importance of acknowledging the diversity 
of the digital technology industry, that voluntary action is not enough, and that more proactive measures for 
ensuring transparency and accountability of industry approaches to child safety online are needed.
The principles along with what is needed to apply them to shape a safe and trusted digital world for 
children are clear, and the Global Digital Compact is the vehicle to make this happen.
Key commitments, pledges, or actions that in your view should be taken by 
different stakeholders – governments, private sector, civil society, etc. - in order 
to realize the above-mentioned principles. 
To translate the above principle into practice and meaningful, global change, key stakeholders, especially 
governments and private sector, need to take several steps individually and jointly, aligned around the same 
goal to create digital spaces where children can be safe and thrive.  
The UN Roadmap for Digital Cooperation  already outlined some key commitments needed: important 
legislative steps, effective cooperation (especially between law enforcement agencies and technology 
companies including more robust, rapid scanning and detection with a great focus on prevention), and 
continued investment in multi-stakeholder partnerships (e.g. WeProtect Global Alliance and End Violence 
Partnership). In addition to these, a group of leading experts convened by the End Violence Partnership 
identified  three core commitments for Governments and private sector based on evidence, research and 
expertise on what works to protect children ( Safe Online Policy Call ): 
Ensure an aligned and coordinated national and industry response via the  adoption and implementation 
of comprehensive child online safety policies based on a child’s right to access the digital world safely 
and securely.  These policies should be in-line with the UNCRC General Comment 25 on children’s rights 
in the digital environment.
Commit to preventing, detecting and stopping all activities that harm children online by applying existing 
frameworks. For example, the recommendations outlined in the ITU Guidelines on Child Online Protection 
for policymakers, ICT Industry, caretakers, educators and children; the WeProtect Global Alliance 
3Model National Response  (MNR) and Global Strategic Response  (GSR) to support governments, private 
sector, international organizations and civil society to better protect children from online CSEA which 
is already used by the Alliance members (90% of 42 surveyed countries  confirmed they have used the 
MNR to understand and develop good practice at the national level); and, the six actions outlined by the 
Broadband Commission Report  to build key capacities and capabilities needed to tackle online CSEA and 
to continue learning through their implementation across the world.
Increase  investments to scale-up solutions that keep children safe, particularly those that tackle 
grooming, live streaming and distribution of CSAM, to address the imbalances in capacity across countries 
and enable effective international collaboration and response.
In the addition to the above core commitments, key stakeholders need to  commit and allocate adequate 
resources to ensure the following:
All efforts to expand connectivity and digital education must go hand-in-hand with child safety.
Ensure a universal response where everyone plays a role with a focus on primary prevention, and safety-
by-design.
Technology tools to tackle online violence against children should be a public good while acknowledging 
the need for more controlled access to certain types of tools for processing sensitive information, and 
technology companies must be at the forefront of the response and promote responsible innovation.
Promote industry transparency and create stronger mechanisms for coordination and accountability for 
effective response on reporting to industry and quality support services.
In line with the UNCRC General Comment 25 , legislations should be in place and be implemented 
to ensure business responsibility and accountability for the respect of children’s rights in digital 
environments, notably by carrying out child rights risk assessments and ensuring a high level of privacy, 
safety and security by design and default.
Generate data and evidence to inform and drive prevention and response to online violence against 
children and especially the worst forms such as online CSEA. Investments should address all forms of 
online violence against children in an integrated way, both across types of violence and alongside its in-
person forms.
Listen to children and increase public awareness of online CSEA; messaging should be developed in 
meaningful consultation with children and backed by evidence.
Safety and protective measures should be designed and implemented in accordance with children’s 
evolving capacities depending on their age and abilities.
Where children have carried out online harm, governments should pursue preventive, safeguarding and 
restorative justice approaches for the children involved.
Tools already exist to guide and assist actors to make this happen – e.g. ITU Child Online Protection 
Guidelines , Child Online Safety Toolkit , Legislating for the digital age , eSafety Self-assessment Tools for 
Technology Companies , UNICEF Child Rights Impact Self-Assessment Tool for mobile operators , UNICEF 
& Western Sydney University Responsible Innovation in Technology for Children . The above actions and 
commitments will ensure an aligned and coordinated response across stakeholders, create the very much 
needed key capacities and capabilities that are needed to tackle online sexual abuse, and address the 
imbalances in capacity across countries and enable effective international collaboration and response. 
4Developed by
Endorsed by
Aulas en Paz Colombia 
Child Rescue Coalition
ChildFund Alliance
Childlight - Global Child Safety Institute
Childline Zimbabwe
ChildSafe Net Nepal
Corporación Colombiana de Padres y Madres  
Red PaPaz
Family Wellbeing Centre Sri Lanka 
Fundacion Paniamor Costa Rica
Huddersfield University
International Justice Mission
International Safety Center Stop Sexting Ukraine
Internet Hotline Provider Macedonia
Internet Watch Foundation
itotheN
Justice and Care 
Marie Collins Foundation
Middlesex University 
Missing Children Europe
MSB Medical School Berlin New Hope Girls NHG République 
Démocratique du Congo
Oficina de Defensoria de Derechos de la 
Infancia Mexico
Pathfinder Kindred Ltd
Population Foundation of India
SaferNet Brazil
Save the Children International
Shanduko Yeupenyu Child Care Zimbabwe
Suojellaan Lapsia Protect Children Finland
Swansea University 
Tech Matters 
Terre des Hommes International Federation
Thorn
University of Kent 
Universidad de los Andes Colombia 
World Vision International
Youth Association for Development Pakistan 
Zana Africa Foundation Kenya 
5

Every child must  
be #SafeOnline! 
Learn more about  
Safe Online hereTo know more, contact  
secretariat@end-violence.org