  
 April 2023 Global Digital Compact Contribution by Austria’s multi-stakeholder internet community  We lend our full and unequivocal support to the Global Digital Compact (GDC) as proposed in the Secretary-General's report Our Common Agenda and the multistakeholder-based discussion processes leading to its finalization, including the work of the co-facilitators appointed by the President of the General Assembly, and the work of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Technology. We take this opportunity to commend the Global Tech Envoy for enabling an inclusive process. We remain convinced that a multi-stakeholder approach not only to internet governance but to global digital policy developments more broadly has substantial advantages and should be used, to the extent possible under international law, as the standard for developing international norms in all cases. Particular advantages of multi-stakeholderism that we feel merit inclusion in the GDC are inclusivity, flexibility, responsiveness and transparency. The multi-stakeholder approach is characterized by openness, transparency, and accountability, which helps to build trust among stakeholders and enhances the legitimacy of global digital policies. The GDC should form a new social contract for the future of the internet. This is essential as the internet has become a public good, a fundamental right and a driver of digitalization which, if harnessed correctly and with appropriate human rights-safeguards can support development in all its forms.  We support a holistic approach to global digital policy. Digital policy is not the responsibility of one state or one department within a government. Digitalization with all its impacts has to be integrated into specialist policies, including those for network and media, economy and industry, education, integration, and culture, to achieve sustainable digitalization within a coherent policy framework. The GDC should set Member States on this course. Moving from various Internet policies to a cross-disciplinary digitalization policy that promotes fundamental rights, innovation, and social cohesion is essential for a sustainable global digital development.  Reliable data is necessary to assess digital policies.  While different indicator-based approaches to assessing national digital policy developments exist, UNESCO's "Internet Universality ROAM-X Indicators" (Rights, Openness, Accessibility, and Multi-stakeholder 
  
2 of 3 Participation) are exemplary in providing a comprehensive framework for assessing a country's state of the internet. We therefore encourage the uptake of selected indicators as yardsticks to measure progress. A particular advantage lies in the ROAM-X indicators policy relevance. This helps to ensure that any assessment is actionable and can lead to concrete improvements in the internet ecosystem. The GDC should consider including an indicator-based model for assessing progress towards agreed digital (sustainable) development goals.  A human rights-based approach to global digital policy-making is essential. In addition, where applicable, ethical guidelines can be useful as first steps towards in the process of crystallizing international legal obligations. In the area of AI, for example, the UNESCO AI Ethics Recommendation is the first international text on AI ethics that has a global reach and was created in a collaborative, inclusive, and open multi-stakeholder-based process. It establishes globally recognized ethical standards for AI-based technologies and applications that respect human rights and international law. With the commitment of 193 Member States, the Recommendation takes a holistic approach by defining ethical AI development and use as a central obligation for society, and formulating concrete action tasks in eleven policy areas. The Guidelines can serve as an ethical framework which – when generalized – can serve global digital policy development – in addition to, and not to the exclusion of, firm human rights commitments.  Data is not only necessary to develop sustainable global digital policy, but is also key to making good regulatory decisions. The way that data is governed across the world shapes power relations, the course and dynamics of sustainable development, international trade and foreign policy. We support a strong commitment, in the GDC, to innovative data models, like data commons, and shared data spaces that empowers communities and individuals. This includes enhancing access to privately held data, maximizing access to open government data, and building on excellent proposals, like regional data spaces, to innovate how data can be connected and harnessed to achieve societal progress while safeguarding rights and privacy. The GDC should also address the challenges and possibilities of decentralized networks (like Mastodon), as an alternative to profit-oriented privately owned media platforms, and of future iteration of the internet, where virtual and augmented reality technologies merge to create a shared virtual space that users can access and interact with in real time (“metaverse”). Existing metaverse platforms are still relatively limited in scope compared to the vision of a fully-realized metaverse. They are usually standalone experiences with their own rules, economies, and user bases, rather than a seamless, interconnected virtual universe that anyone can access and interact with in a unified way. The GDC should consider 
  
3 of 3 which values and rules should apply in fully immersive virtual worlds as spaces that blur the lines between the physical and digital worlds. The GDC should also include the importance of aligning private orders with public values through the inclusion of a variety of voices in the internal decision-making process, especially regarding the interaction of rules and algorithmic recommender systems.  