 
      Belliardstraat 20 (6th floor) 1040 Brussels, Belgium              +32 2 627 5550                 secretariat@centr.org              www.centr.org  
 1 
28 APRIL 2023 • Brussels, Belgium  
CENTR feedback to the Global Digital Compact  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
CENTR is the association of European country code top -level domain registries (hereinafter ccTLDs). All EU 
member state and EEA country ccTLD registries (such as DENIC administering .de for Germany and NORID 
managing .no for Norway) are members of CENTR. T ogether, CENTR members are responsible for over 80% of 
all registered domain names worldwide.  
ccTLDs are responsible for operating and maintaining the technical Domain Name System (DNS) infrastructure 
for their top -level domain. The DNS is a well -establis hed network protocol at the heart of the internet 
infrastructure – commonly thought of as the “phone book of the internet”. It provides a navigation function to 
map user -friendly domain names to numeric IP addresses.   
CENTR members are at the core of the public internet, safeguarding its resilience, stability and security. The 
majority of European ccTLD registries are non -profit organisations, providing an internet infrastructure service 
in the interest of and in close cooperation with their local internet  communities (i.e., registrars, end -users, Summary  of CENTR’s recommendations  
• CENTR urges governments to refrain from introducing unnecessary and disproportionate 
barriers to the domain name registration process via national and international legislation, as 
well as promote balanced and evidence -based policymaking, in order to retain the universal 
accessibility of essential digital infrastructure, such as the DNS.  
• To ensure balanced and eviden ce-based policymaking, we strongly encourage greater dialogue 
between policy -makers and the technical internet infrastructure community.  
• All stakeholders should support and respect the multistakeholder governance of the DNS, 
which facilitates the developme nt of common open standards and protocols supporting global 
interoperability (e.g., standard -setting in the IETF).  
• Given the cross -border nature of the technical infrastructure, governments should ensure that 
data protection regulations are non -conflicting , and that there is no need nor justification for 
the lowering of data protection standards.  
• All stakeholders should recognise that the technical internet infrastructure is not an 
appropriate point for intervention on content -related issues. Addressing so cietal problems 
with purely technical solutions, including through interventions via the technical internet 
infrastructure, should be avoided.  
 
     Belliardstraat 20 (6th floor) 1040 Brussels, Belgium               +32 2 627 5550                 secretariat@centr.org              www.centr.org                         2 
 
CENTR feedback to the Global Digital Compact  
rightsholders but also in cooperation with CSIRTs, law enforcement, data and consumer protection authorities, 
as well as governments).  
Notably, ccTLD registries only hold information enabling users to navigate th e internet but do not host, store, 
transmit or control any content online. This is not their expected role; domain name holders are primarily 
responsible for the use of the domain name and for any related services, such as websites associated with the 
doma in name.  
CENTR welcomes the opportunity to participate in the preparatory phase for the Global Digital Compact. As a 
key member of the European technical community, CENTR would like to outline the following key areas for 
maintaining an “open, free and secu re digital future for all”.  
Connect all people to the internet, including schools  
a) Core principles  
The Domain Name System (DNS) is integral to the functioning of the internet. It performs the essential task of 
translating IP addresses to human -readable domain names that are used by all connected devices and online 
services (browsers, e -mail exchanges, streaming service s, smartphones and laptops), as well as more invisible 
infrastructure roles that the internet relies on.  
The DNS is a flex ible, resilient and scalable infrastructure. It is not linked to a particular device (e.g., an IP address 
might change, but the domain name remains the same), and ensures reliability via decentralisation and built -in 
redundancy (i.e., if one server is unre achable, several alternatives can be queried). The DNS is built to withstand 
heavy workloads, and its underlying technical components have been refined and optimised for over 40 years.  
The Global Digital Compact should take into consideration the importance of essential technical infrastructure, 
such as the DNS, for the stability, resilience and security of the internet.   
A domain name is also crucial for establishing one’s identity onl ine, as well as being the foundational piece of 
infrastructure on which to build a business, develop a product or offer an e -government service.  
European ccTLDs invest greatly in ensuring that domain names are accessible, at a reasonable cost. The domain 
name registration process is globally organised as per the “first come, first served” principle, which allows 
domains to be accessible to all internet users without discrimination. Recent regulation in the intellectual 
property (IP) space has sought to sub vert this principle, by disproportionately privileging certain groups (e.g., 
via alert systems for IP rightsholders) over other legitimate beneficiaries. The imbalances introduced by such 
attempts erode the trust that users have in the DNS and their abilit y to participate fully on the internet. 
Furthermore, such imbalances may be disruptive for the competitiveness of smaller national infrastructure 
actors that are faced with more stringent legal requirements, as opposed to bigger global actors.  
Hence, to e nsure balanced and evidence -based policymaking, which takes into account the technical reality and 
potential impacts on the accessibility of essential digital infrastructure, such as the DNS, CENTR strongly 
encourages greater dialogue between policy -makers  and the technical internet infrastructure community.  
 
     Belliardstraat 20 (6th floor) 1040 Brussels, Belgium               +32 2 627 5550                 secretariat@centr.org              www.centr.org                         3 
 
CENTR feedback to the Global Digital Compact  
The Global Digital Compact should strongly emphasise that universal access to essential infrastructure, such as 
domain names, is the central tenet of a free, inclusive and open internet.  
It is well -established in global internet governance that differences are allowed between the policy 
arrangements of ccTLDs and gTLDs, and amongst ccTLDs, in particular, informed by national particularities or 
needs. This model show s that digital autonomy and global int eroperability are not mutually exclusive. Bridging 
these accepted differences, ccTLD registries voluntarily share their experiences amongst peers in different fora 
- including ICANN, CENTR or Regional Internet Registries (e.g., RIPE NCC) - to contribute to  overall online safety.  
CENTR members support their local communities’ digital presence and connectivity. Some notable examples 
cover responses to the Covid -19 pandemic and education programmes for marginalised communities . 
At the beginning of the Covid pa ndemic, an initiative co -founded by DNS Belgium, the registry behind .be, 
provided young people with 12.000 refurbished laptops , to facilitate home -schoolin g and bridge digital divides. 
In addition to this, NOMINET, who runs the .uk ccTLD, invests in sustainable data poverty initiatives  to make 
internet  access free for people on very low incomes. CIRA, the registry administering .ca, awards grants to fund 
locally -led connectivity initiatives  in rural, Northern and Indigenous communities in Canada, in support of 
innovative solutions to overcome natural hurdles to infrastruct ure. In their Digital Town Awards , the .ie Domain 
Registry similarly rewards digital achievements within local communities. The Portuguese registry, .pt , has set 
up the ‘ Rampa Digital ’ training and digital literacy programme, aimed at accelerating economic recovery 
through digital technology, training and mentoring for SMEs,  with a differentiated focus on marginalised 
individuals. Similarly, SK -NIC, who runs .sk, funds many projects which foster digital inclusion, such as a recent 
initiative supporting digital literacy among children with disabilities , via a custom -made app. CZ.NIC, the registry 
administering .cz, is one of four organisations that run the Safer Internet Centre of the Czech Republic , an 
education and prevention centre to make the internet safer for children and young people, as well as their 
guardians. The registry responsible for .me also leads digital literacy campaigns for children and young people, 
such as programming competitions . EURid, who runs .eu, likewise supports digital literacy programmes in 
collaboration with schools and universities.  
b) Key commitments  
• Governments should prioritise balanced a nd evidence -based policymaking in the digital area, being 
mindful of its impact on the accessibility of essential digital infrastructure, such as the DNS.  
• Governments should refrain from introducing unnecessary and disproportionate barriers to the domain 
name registration process via national and international legislation, in the interest of ensuring a level -
playing field for all infrastructure actors, irrespective of their size.  
• The technical community shall continue exchanging good practices of abuse mit igation within their 
technical remit in order to contribute to overall safety online.  
• Technical infrastructure actors, such as ccTLDs, support, where necessary, their local communities’ 
digital presence and education, through information sharing and outrea ch programmes.  
 
 
     Belliardstraat 20 (6th floor) 1040 Brussels, Belgium               +32 2 627 5550                 secretariat@centr.org              www.centr.org                         4 
 
CENTR feedback to the Global Digital Compact  
Avoid internet fragmentation  
a) Core principles  
In order to have a meaningful conversation on the avoidance of internet fragmentation, the challenge of 
defining what it means must first be overcome. CENTR expects that the Global Digital Compa ct will build on 
prior work in differentiating between various manifestations of internet fragmentation, foremost the recent 
framework  develope d by the Internet Governance Forum’s Policy Network on Internet Fragmentation. As 
guardians of the technical internet infrastructure, CENTR members would like to emphasise the difference 
between two areas of internet fragmentation .  
First, fragmentation in  the internet’s technical layer should be avoided. At present, the technical underpinnings 
of the internet remain global and uniform. However, as soon as there is interference in the technical stack, 
including the DNS, interoperability of the free and open  internet is jeopardised. The Global Digital Compact 
should emphasise deference to multistakeholder internet governance processes, designed to avoid 
fragmentation of the DNS at a technical level.  
Second, legislative interventions in the operation of the D NS may result in unwanted consequences, such as 
conflicts between policies and standards set by the global internet governance community and national 
legislation. In doing so, fragmentation emerges in terms of conflicting legal requirements which technical  
operators, such as TLD registries, must adhere to. Even well -intentioned legislative interventions in (supra -) 
national jurisdictions may undermine global voluntary commitments and create technical conflicts (e.g., recent 
legislative efforts on Geographical Indicators in the EU , and the  Sony v Quad9 case ). Therefore, the Global Digital 
Compact should stress the need for national legislation to carefully  assess the level of its interference with 
voluntary protocols and standards, by making sure that the technical community’s expertise and feedback is 
dutifully taken into consideration when new legislation is drafted and negotiated.  
The Global Digital Com pact must acknowledge the role of the multistakeholder model in developing global 
internet infrastructure. CENTR expects the Global Digital Compact to maintain and strengthen respect towards 
the key principles of the free and open internet, which  are also at the core of global internet governance and  
prevent fragmentation. The core principles underpinning the technical and operational stability of the internet 
include interoperability, common open standards and protocols. Respect for these principles by all  
stakeholders, from governments to businesses, is quintessential. The coexistence of two parallel streams of 
governance, at the national/regional and multistakeholder levels, should be avoided at all costs, where these 
core principles are concerned. The Gl obal Digital Compact should therefore support the multistakeholder fora 
in which the core principles of the free and open internet are negotiated (e.g., IETF, ICANN).  
At the same time, regional and national particularities are already reflected in the way  national ccTLDs are 
operating and setting their terms and conditions. While ccTLDs operate based on global standards at a technical 
level, they set their own policies and procedures according to national rules and needs. ccTLDs participate in 
regional org anisations, such as CENTR for Europe, to promote and participate in the development of a high 
standard of ccTLD management for the benefit of their local internet community and the global internet.  
 
     Belliardstraat 20 (6th floor) 1040 Brussels, Belgium               +32 2 627 5550                 secretariat@centr.org              www.centr.org                         5 
 
CENTR feedback to the Global Digital Compact  
CENTR members are committed to maintaining the resilience,  stability and security of the DNS infrastructure 
via national initiatives, such as PTSOC , which serves as the Portuguese national cybersecurity cooperation forum 
between .pt, gove rnmental authorities and the user community. Further, to deepen and expand European 
ccTLDs’ long -established collaboration in the security field, CENTR acts as an Information Sharing and Analysis 
Centre (ISAC), by creating a secure environment for exchangi ng security -related information, data and 
collaboration on good practices. In the face of cybersecurity threats, ccTLD registries have adopted a variety of 
practices, which reflect that uniformity is not necessary, and that there is strength in diversity. As a result, there 
is no single point of failure.  
CENTR expects the Global Digital Compact to recognise different manifestations of internet fragmentation, and 
that differences between TLDs’ policy arrangements are a feature, not a bug.  
b) Key commitments  
• Policymakers must take into account the multistakeho lder model when drafting national/international 
legislation concerning internet infrastructure, due to the global and universal nature of the internet.  
• All stakeholders should support and respect the multistakeholder governance of the DNS, which 
facilitate s the development of common open standards and protocols supporting global 
interoperability (e.g., the development of standards in the IETF).  
• ccTLD registries should be able to adopt policies and procedures which meet local needs, while 
safeguarding the co mmon technical core of the DNS. Diverging policies do not automatically equate to 
fragmentation, when the technical underpinnings remain universal and interoperable.  
• CENTR members continue their collaboration efforts to strengthen cybersecurity and contrib ute to the 
resilience, safety and stability of the DNS infrastructure.  
Protect data  
a) Core principles  
ccTLD registries maintain a domain name registration database. This database contains the contact information 
of domain name holders, as well as technical and administrative data that is necessary to provide DNS services. 
Registration data can be queried by the general public using different protocols like the web, WHOIS and RDAP, 
each offering their own unique controls to comply with the EU General Data Pro tection Regulation (GDPR). 
Access to registration data is inter alia governed by relevant data protection and information security rules, aas 
per national and regional legislation.  
Even before the conception of the EU GDPR, European ccTLDs had developed b est practices to adhere to data 
protection principles, such as the use of clear and transparent policies, as well as data minimisation, to 
guarantee that only data that is strictly necessary for the performance of their essential functions is collected 
and processed.  
CENTR members are committed to protecting domain name holders’ data. There is high demand for accessing 
domain owners’ personal or financial information, primarily for law enforcement purposes. Access requests for 
 
     Belliardstraat 20 (6th floor) 1040 Brussels, Belgium               +32 2 627 5550                 secretariat@centr.org              www.centr.org                         6 
 
CENTR feedback to the Global Digital Compact  
domain name holders’ registra tion data must be rooted in clear legal bases and respect due process. There is 
no need nor justification for lowering data protection standards for domain name registration data.   
A clear example is the above -mentioned  data minimisation. In general, the DNS requires no personal data to 
function. For administrative purposes (e.g. invoicing) a minimal dataset is maintained for these specific 
contractual purposes. Demands for the collection of more personal data do not only breach the principle of 
data minim isation, but also enlarge the risk of data breaches.  
CENTR expects the Global Digital Compact to support the establishment of a global consensus on minimum data 
protection standards, applicable to internet infrastructure operators, such as TLD registries,  to support 
universal respect for the right to privacy, while balancing the needs to access domain name registration data 
for reasons of public interest, based on due process.  
b) Key commitments  
• All actors agree that there is no need nor justification for the  lowering of data protection standards as 
they relate to domain name registration and the provision of the technical infrastructure.  
• Given the cross -border nature of the technical infrastructure, governments should strive for global 
consensus on minimum da ta protection standards applicable to internet infrastructure actors, 
balancing the need to respect the right to privacy and supporting the rule of law.  
• The technical community and industry actors shall respect and be mindful of data protection in the 
context of the provision of the essential technical infrastructure. Clear and transparent public policies 
must be set out on the purposes of data collection and use.  
• CENTR members are committed to a high standard of protection for domain name holders’ data and 
other legitimate rights within their technical remit, and legal requirements applicable to them.  
Apply human rights online  
a) Core principles  
The Global Digital Co mpact should commit to the protection of the free and open internet, as a facilitator for 
the exercise of human rights.  
In the past years, CENTR members have observed a trend for governments to push for intervention on illegal 
and harmful content via the internet infrastructure. However, societal problems and the technical internet 
infrastructure should be strictly separated. Anything else constitutes a threat to exercising one’s human rights 
online (e.g. freedom of expression or fair trial/due process), a s intervention on content via the DNS is inherently 
disproportionate as well as fundamentally misunderstanding its role as technical infrastructure.  
First, DNS actors have no insight into or control over the content associated with the domains they regist er, but 
rather fulfil a purely technical, administrative function. Misconceptions of how the technical internet 
infrastructure works create unrealistic expectations on the part of policy -makers, which, in turn, creates a 
disconnect between legal rule and t echnical reality that may threaten respect for human rights.  
 
     Belliardstraat 20 (6th floor) 1040 Brussels, Belgium               +32 2 627 5550                 secretariat@centr.org              www.centr.org                         7 
 
CENTR feedback to the Global Digital Compact  
Second, intervention via the DNS layer is a ‘nuclear’ option, given that illegal content cannot be surgically 
removed (as with an edit to a web page or deletion of an individual Tweet, for exampl e). Rather, interventions 
at the DNS level remove entire domains, with a significant risk of collateral damage for access to legal content 
or unrelated services, such as e -mail services using the respective domain name. Such interventions are also 
inherent ly ineffective, as the DNS is an addressing system at its core; the illegal content is not deleted by 
deregistering an associated domain. Intervention on illegal content at infrastructure level can only be reserved 
for exceptional circumstances, following a clear legal basis and after an adequate assessment by the competent 
public authorities. In this context, CENTR members are committed to safeguarding internet users’ human rights 
by insisting on due process and transparency, when approached for content in terventions.  
Nevertheless, European ccTLD registries are committed to ensuring a high level of trust for all internet users 
when navigating to domain names within their respective TLD zones. European ccTLD registries have 
consistently been recognised as operators of TL D zones with the least amount of abuse . This is done through a 
variety of different practices and policies, rooted within national context and consumer protection law regimes, 
among others. For example, there are a vari ety of registration data accuracy practices  adopted by European 
ccTLD registries, that allow registries to take action (including susp ending a domain name) based on inaccurate 
registration data, keeping registry action to its technical remit and information available to them. The crux of 
the strength of the European ccTLD space is diversity in data accuracy approaches. It allows flexibil ity and 
adaptability of national context, business model and regulatory needs.  
The Global Digital Compact should insist that public authorities follow the rule of law, rooted in democratic 
process, when addressing illegal content and other forms of abuse online. Addressing societal problems with 
purely technical solutions, including through interventions via the technical internet infrastructure should be 
avoided.  
Considering the inherent global nature of the internet, the Global Digital Compact should en courage inter alia 
the review of existing international multilateral mutual assistance agreements, as well as the efficiency of 
current processes available to law enforcement authorities for fulfilling their role efficiently within due process 
requirements .  
b) Key commitments  
• All stakeholders should acknowledge that the technical internet infrastructure is not an appropriate 
point for intervention on content -related issues.  
• All stakeholders  should  recognise, in addition, that intervention on content at the D NS layer is as 
ineffective as it is disproportionate. Human rights are jeopardised, if interventions in internet 
infrastructure threaten the free and open internet.  
• ccTLD registries are not in the position to remove content. Any content -related interventio n at the 
domain name level needs to be accompanied by a clear legal basis and assessment by competent 
authorities.  
• CENTR members shall safeguard human rights by insisting on the tenets of the rule of law, transparency 
and due process.  