   
 
   
 AUSTRALIAN INTERNET GOVERNANCE COMMUNITY INPUT TO THE 
GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
We, the undersigned members of the Australian internet governance community,  believe that 
digital technologies and the online environment provide  unprecedented opportunities for 
sustainable economic growth and social wellbeing  globally . However, we also acknowledge 
that  they have given  rise to complex risks and profound challenges  that cannot be solved by 
any single government or entity . 
We consider  a holistic approach driven by the need to put people first should be the key 
motivator in devising a strategy that maximise s the benefits whilst minimising the harms that 
the digital world offers. Key values that guide this  process  must include human rights, 
international law, inclusiveness, transparency and sustainability.  
We urge the ongoing process es supporting the development of the Global Digital Compact  
(GDC) , including the work of the multistakeholder technology track and the parallel 
intergovernmental process , to commit to and implement in practice  the highest standards of 
inclusivity, transparency and openness in progressing its work.  
Key considerations  
We propose the following broad principles  be considered  in developing a Global Digital 
Compact that provides for an ‘open, free and secure digital future for all’1: 
 
Connectivity  
Core Principles:  
We support a shared commitment to improving connectivity , bridging the digital divide, 
promoting social inclusion and overall prosperity. Th ese are  social, economic and political 
issue s, incorporat ing a range of challenges  from  enabling  affordable and accessible 
infrastructure , to developing  digital skills and appropriate applications and services . These 
challenges can only be  resolved by a collectiv e commitment  that draws on the expertise of 
multistakeholder collaboration . 
Key Commitments : 
We encourage cooperation  and collaboration across the technical, government and private 
sectors  to address the challenges impeding connectivity.  We urge the GDC to draw on 
multistakeholder  expertise and to recognise  the need for  joint commitment s and 
collaborative initiatives  that promote the deployment and development of digital 
infrastructure  and skills . At the same time, the GDC should encourage  forward -looking , 
cohesive , evidence -based policy and regulatory frameworks that support the deliver y of 
practical , affordable  and sustainable outcomes.   
 
 
1 Our common Agenda - Report of the UN Secretary General, paragraph 93, September 2021.  
   
 
   
 Avoid internet fragmentation  
Core Principles:  
The Internet is a complex and robust ecosystem and its remarkable success over the past 
twenty years  is centred in its design as an open, interconnected, globally interoperable 
network of networks  combined with the multistakeholder model of governance.   
Realising the full social and economic benefits of the internet is dependent on balancing a 
diverse range of government, technical and civil society interests . However, recent, technical, 
legislative and policy developments  at the national and regional lev el are risking its 
fragmentation and threatening to undermine the internet’s true utility as a global 
interconnected network of networks , putting at risk its associated social and economic 
benefits.    
A fragmented internet is unlikely to deliver more than a small proportion  of the utility which 
the current  global internet is already delivering  and on which we can continue to build into 
the future.   Therefore, m inimising the risks of fragmentation, protecting and safeguarding 
both the internet’s  design  and its multistakeholder governance arrangements  is essential to 
fulfill ing its potential, including as an important tool to achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals ( SDG’s ). 
Key Commitments:    
We encourage  the GDC to emphasise the importance of all stakeholders (eg;  governments, 
technical community, civil society),  working  together to find consensus and  cultivate  a 
shared vision for the future of the internet  where  its social and economic benefits are realise d. 
We propose  that the GDC reaffirm its commitment to promot ing and sustain ing an internet 
that is open, free,  secure and globally  interoperable, and is  governed by multistakeholder 
processes. We also encourage the GDC to promote the use  of toolkits such as the ISOC 
Impact Assessment Toolkit and their F.A.S.T approach to assessing fragmentation risks  and 
enabling users to identif y whether a proposal, development or trend could benefit or threaten 
the operations of the  Internet . 
  
Data protection  
Core Principles :  
The growth in the generation and use of  data, fuelled by technological developments ha s 
enabled the development of multiple businesses, products and services . However, t he way 
data is collected and used (or not use d), presents both opportunities and risks. A key risk is 
the lack of trust that can dissuade users from participating in the digital economy . Its 
immense power and value, if harnessed appropriately can help to meet the SD Gs and inform 
evidence -based decision making . 
Data protection is more than just protection against the collection and misuse of our data . It 
also includes protection against manipulation, disadvantage, and discrimination.  Going 
   
 
   
 forward, w e support and call for a concerted effort to building m ultistakeholder partnerships  
to work together to maximis e data use while minimis ing its potential for  misu se.   
Key Commitments : 
We propose a multistakeholder collaboration that  addresses the lack of trust , ensures 
openness  and transparency in the collection  and use  of data  and institutes appropriate 
safeguards to minimise the misuse of data.  
 
Application of human rights online  
Core Principles:  
Digital technologies provide unparallel ed opportunities for the promotion , advancement and 
defence of human rights . However , they also provide the means to suppress, limit and violate 
rights, for example, through surveillance, censorship  and online harassment,  algorithmic bias 
and automated decision -making systems . If we , as a global community , are to subscribe to a 
human centric digital ecosystem, we must ensure that h uman rights whether online o r offline 
are protected and safeguarded.  
Key Commitments:  
Rights online must be afforded the same protections as those offline, in accordance  with the 
rule of law and international human rights legal obligations.  There must be consistency and 
certainty i n application  and compliance must be mandated.  
 
Accountability criteria for disinformation and misleading content   
Core Principles:  
Misinformation and disinformation whether offline or online, threaten to undermine the overall 
wellbeing of our societies and economies. While advancements in digital technologies and 
information ecosystems offer new opportunities to share and consume info rmation, they also 
have the capacity to create and perpetuate content that can polarise and undermine trust , 
resulting in social fragmentation.  Attempts to address these challenges are varied. These 
can include direct and narrow measures targeted at conte nt or broader more systemic 
approaches aimed at improving the technical operations of digital ecosystems.  
Interventions must also recognise and protect the value of free speech and information. This 
is a multifaceted problem,  and we believe the collective  expertise of diverse stakeholders is 
critical to addressing these challenges holistically.  
Key commitments : 
We encourage the GDC to  support a collective commitment to addressing disinformation 
and misleading content. The GDC should  draw on multistakeholder expertise and  discourage 
duplication of effort by  consider ing existing initiatives such as the World Wide Web 
Consortium’s Credible Web Community Group work2, the Internet IEEE's dataport repositories 
 
2 https://credweb.org  
   
 
   
 of Fake News3 and specific symposium s such as 24th International Conference on 
Information and Communications  Security (ICICS 2022)4. 
 
Regulation of AI  
Core Principles:  
Artificial Intelligence  is rapidly evolving, transforming societies and economies. As the use of 
AI applications increase s, so too do concerns related to human values, fairness, privacy, 
safety and accountability. Collaborative multistakeholder expertise must be actively 
encouraged and facilitated in order to progress the transformative benefits of AI while 
mitigating the risks.  
The Future of Life Institute ’s open  letter calling for a six month pause in the development of AI 
syste ms highlights the growing nervousness in many quarters of the potential  dangers of the  
rapid and  unregulated growth of AI systems. The letter5 states : “AI labs and independent 
experts should use this pause to jointly develop and implement a set of shared safety 
protocols for advanced AI design and development that are rigorously audited and overseen 
by independent outside experts .”  
We believe that AI should operate on human -centred values and be used for purposes that 
are beneficial to society. T he regulation and use of AI systems should ensure reliability and 
safe use , and  be transparent, accountable  and contestable regarding its purpose, use and 
design . It should also  provide for privacy and security of data.   
Key Commitments:  
The GDC should endorse the need for all stakeholders to work together to shape the 
development and beneficial use of AI technologies based on the above principles.  The GDC 
should support and not duplicate the ongoing work streams  on AI, including in the OECD, EU,  
and the IGF’s Policy Network on AI 6(PNAI ) and instead  promote their cohesive collaboration  in 
order to min imise duplication . 
 
Digital commons   
Core Principles : 
Technology development has created unprecedented opportunities, fostering collaboration, 
connection and development. However , its potential for harm (e .g.: cybersecurity, lack of trust 
and accountability, the lack of equitable access to informat ion or knowledge resources), 
appear to be increasingly overshadowing its benefits. Regulation is struggling to keep pace 
with technology developments, complex ethical and social questions continue to challenge, 
and vested interests seek to dominate discuss ions seeking solutions. To address these 
complexities, a collaboration that draws on a varied knowledge base is critical to developing 
 
3 https://ieee -data port.org/keywords/fake -news  
4 https://www.ieee -security.org/Calendar/cfps/cfp -ICICS2022.html  
5 https://futureoflife.org/open -letter/pause -giant -ai-experiments / 
6 Policy Network on Artificial Intelligence (PNAI) | Internet Governance Forum (intgovforum.org)  
   
 
   
 solutions that are broad based and forward looking. A multistakeholder collaboration will also 
help to progress consensus -based  outcomes that have considered a range of perspectives.  
Key Commitments : 
The GDC should  support a human centric approach to digital transformation and encourage 
and actively support multistakeholder collaboration in shaping all aspects of digital policy. 
The digital commons is a shared resource and a global good that must benefit all humanit y 
and not be stifled or segmented by technological, legal -political or societal measures. Digital 
policies should promote trust and accountability, encourage innovation and foster access 
based on open , community developed standards.  
 
Other areas  
Multistakeholder cooperation  
Core Principles:  
Technological developments bring both benefits and challenges , and t he rapid pace of 
change  requires  increasingly agile  and flexible responses.  
The UN7 has pledged to “improve digital cooperation”  given we live in an age of ‘digital 
interdependence’8. Improving digital cooperation requires a collaborative approach that  
draws on the varied expertise of the multistakeholder community.  Paragraph 93 of the ‘Our 
Common Agenda ’ report also recognise s the value of mu ltistakeholder collaboration  by 
calling for a multistakeholder digital technology track to develop the GDC  which will outline 
‘shared principles for an open free and secure digital future for all’9.    
Digital technologies have been recognised as a critical tool in achieving  the SDGs. The 17 
SDGs are broad ranging, united by the overarching goal10 to ensure ‘peace and prosperity for 
people and the planet, now and for the future’. However, the depth , range and complex 
interlinkages of the SDGs  makes this an almost unachievable goal without inclusive 
collaboration across all stakeholder groups (government, private sector, the technical 
community, academics, civil society).   
Complex d igital  issues cannot properly be addressed in silos. Effective , practical  and fit for 
purpose  solutions are best develop ed via multistakeholder processes, draw ing on the 
expertise of a range of relevant stakeholders . These processes should provide for open and 
inclusive bottom -up participation, and transparent, consensus -based decision -making.  
Multistakeholder p rocesses  allow ideas and proposals to be debated on their merits  and to 
consider a diverse range  of perspectives. This increa ses the  legitimacy and credibility of 
outcomes , generat ing greater  support  and commitment  to implementation , and reduc es the 
risk of  unintended consequences . 
 
7 UNGA Resolution:  A/RES/75/1  
8 The Age of Digital Interdependence: Report of the UN Secretary General’s High Level Panel on Digital Cooperation (2019)  
9 Our common Agenda - Report of the UN Secretary General, paragraph 9 3, September 2021  
10 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  
   
 
   
 This multistakeholder approach has driven innovation and continual improvement to the 
internet.  The Internet Engineering Task Force  develops open standards that enhance the 
operation of the internet collaboratively through multistakeholder , transparent processes. The 
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers , which coordinates the internet’s 
unique identifiers, develops policy via multistakeholder processes . Key outcomes include the 
transition of stewardship of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority . 
The UN itself  encourages multistakeholder collabora tion and has had significant success in 
this regard . This include s outcomes related to the World Summit on the Information Society 
(WSIS), such as the WSIS multistakeholder forums and the Internet Governance Forum . 
We recognise  the multistakeholder  approach is not without its challenges . The  existing  
processes and institutions will need to continually evolve and be strengthened  if they are to  
respond effectively to current policy issues , such as abusive online content , or AI and 
emerging digital issues. However, it remains  a proven m ethod  for responding to the complex 
and dynamic policy and technical challenges that will continue to arise in the  digital world .  
Key Commitments:  
Reaffirming commitment to  the multistakeholder approach  and multistakeholder principles 
will encourage and  strengthen  the trust environment that is essential to developing  and 
implementing  pragmatic policy.  This will also strengthen commitment to evolv ing 
multistakeholder  processes  so they are efficient , effective and produce  outcomes that are fit 
for purpose .  
Challenges will continue to emerge  as a result of ongoing  technolog ical development and it 
is important to recognise that no single stakeholder group will hold  all the solutions.  
Multistakeholder participation  should be  encouraged and provided for within the multilateral 
systems and the international structures that seek to regulate  the fast -changing digital age.   
We encourage recognition of the multis takeholder approach and support strengthening 
multistakeholder participation  within existing work streams  and forums . This will  minimis e the 
potential for duplication and encoura ge greater cooperation , collaboration  and sharing of 
expertise .   
We also enc ourage inclusive  multistakeholder  consideration of how to innovate and adapt 
existing multistakeholder  processes  to address  new and  emerging challeng es and develop 
effective solutions.  
 
Internet Governance Forum (IGF)  
Core Principles:  
The IGF is a key WSIS outcome and a pioneering example of multistakeholder collaboration.  
As a global multistakeholder platform that facilitates discussion  and information sharing , it 
has the potential to  develop innovative solutions to a variety of digital policy issues.  
Since its inception, the IGF has evolved into a network of structures that now  includes 
Dynamic Coalitions, Best Practice Forums, Policy Networks and National, Regional and Youth 
   
 
   
 IGFs . These various streams target different audiences and together with its capacity building 
focus reach es a broad spectrum of stakeholders . Its non -binding, non -decision making  
format facilitates discussion of issues in a space that is not contentious and not necessarily 
influenced by geopolitics and national sovereignty priorities . We believe that the IGF  can 
improve digital cooperation by facilitating consideration of  a series of perspectives with  an 
issues -based problem -solving approach .  
Key Commitments:  
We propose that the GDC recommit to  the IGF and encourage consideration of ways to 
enhance  its value and efficiency  as both a discussion forum and a  key source of information 
on digital policy issues . We not e the IGF has adapt ed and evolve d in response to changing 
expectations . We believe this  flexibility  is one of its core strength s which will allow it to respond 
quickly t o future digital challenges . 
 
We note the WSIS +20 review will consider the IGF mandate. We support the continuation of 
the IGF and its ongoing evolution and development as part of the internet ecosystem.  We 
consider it an important resource to build capacity and contribute meaningfully to digital 
policy discussions .  
 
Signatures  
The undersigned individuals and organisations have developed this contribution and are 
broadly representative of diverse Australian internet communities, from civil society, 
academia, business, the technical community and the government . 
Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC)  
.au Domain Administration  
Internet Association of Au stralia  
Internet Australia  
Identity Digital Australia  
Tech Policy Design Centre, Australian National University.  
Klée Aiken  
Donna Austin  
Keith Besgrove, Chair, General Advisory Standing Committee, .au Domain Administration  
Jordan Carter  
Sabina Fernando  
Caroline Greenway  
   
 
   
 Cheryl Langdon -Orr  
Holly Raiche  
John Stanton CEO Communications Alliance Ltd  
Annaliese Williams, Chair, NetThing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 