 
German Environment Agency 
1 28. April 2023 
 
GERMAN ENVIRONMENT AGENCY SUBMISSION TO THE GDC 
 
A. PROCESS OF PREPARATION 
 
As we continue to advance in the digital age, it's critical to analyse how digitalisation impacts the 
environment. At the German Environment Agency (UBA), our goal is to make digitalisation 
environmentally friendly, and to foster digital and socio-technical solutions towards 
sustainability.  
That's why UBA serves as a dedicated Co-Champion of the Coalition for Digital Environmental 
Sustainability  (CODES), a global alliance working for a Sustainable Planet in the Digital Age. CODES 
was mandated by the UN Envoy on Technology to address the nexus between digital 
transformation and environmental sustainability as part of the follow-up process to the UN 
Secretary General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.  
This submission expresses the view of UBA in its capacity as a co-champion of CODES. We fully 
endorse the submission made by CODES, align with the proposed principles and propose some 
additional actions in this submission. Any views expressed are the views of the UBA and may not 
in any circumstances be regarded as stating an official position of the Federal Republic of 
Germany. 
B. CORE PRINCIPLES 
 
Digitalisation is not an end to it itself. Therefore, it is essential that the Global Digital Compact and 
its goals for the digital transformation are proactively aligned with the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development to ensure the protection of human dignity, global prosperity, and a 
healthy planet in the digital age. This requires an UN-based risk assessment approach of the digital 
transformation and its impacts on people and planet – only a systematic built-up of global 
capacities, competencies, standards, and governance frameworks allows us to address negative 
digital impacts that still too often act as powerful accelerators of unsustainable trends. The global 
community must prioritize making digitalisation more sustainable, inclusive, and equitable as 
part of a whole-of-society approach. The global community must redirect and incentivize 
investments in those socio-technical innovations that clearly contribute to achieving our common 
sustainability goals.  
In this line of reasoning and as a strong supporter and co-champion of the Coalition for Digital 
Environmental Sustainability CODES, we endorse the recommendations of CODES to the Global 
Digital Compact:  
1. THE “ENABLE ALIGNMENT TO SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT” PRINCIPLE  - Reorient 
the purpose of digitalization to develop common visions, values and renewed objectives 
for sustainable development in the Digital Age. The global community needs to 
proactively shape and govern digital change as a fundamental sustainability issue of the 
21st Century.  
2. THE “MITIGATE HARM WITH SUSTAINABLE DIGITALIZATION” PRINCIPLE - Ensure 
that the negative environmental and social impacts of the Digital Age are mitigated. The 
global community needs to make digital infrastructures, products and services more 
sustainable, inclusive and equitable within a whole-of-society approach. 
3. THE “INNOVATE WITH PURPOSE” PRINCIPLE - Ensure that all stakeholders channel 
large investments, capacity development and collective efforts in socio-technical 
innovations towards achieving our sustainable development goals.  The global 
community needs to incentivise and steer these actions and investments across all policy 
levels and sustainability needs. 
 
C. KEY COMMITMENTS, PLEDGES, ACTIONS 
 
We endorse the nine actions developed in the GDC submission of CODES. As a German actor at the 
science-policy interface and with experience on (digital) eco-design and sustainability policies in 
the Digital Age, we further propose three specific actions to support each of the three principles 
laid out above: 
     
1. Implement a “ Global Digital Sustainability Outlook” (GDSO) : Considering the rapid 
speed of digital transformation and its deep impacts on people, societies and our planet, 
we support – as overarching common action of the GDC – the institutionalization of a 
multi-lateral, UN-based and scientifically-driven GDSO to monitor and assess systemic 
risks of the digital transformation in the short- and long-term perspective on a permanent 
base for further decision-making.    
2.  Build and mainstream an „ UN Eco-design Framework for Sustainable Digital 
Infrastructures “: Taking into account the rapid speed and scale of digital infrastructure 
development in the years to come, the global community must ensure that this massive 
build-up is done in the most sustainable way possible. The UN and international actors 
should develop a reference framework to define and mainstream knowledge and 
respective standards for different digital infrastructures. The framework should be 
binding for UN entities and guide international funding, investment decisions, and 
capacity development programs. To facilitate purposeful data collection and the 
application of the framework, a transdisciplinary “Centre for Sustainable Digital 
Infrastructures” should support practical implementation.    
3. Set up a „ Global Innovation Mechanism for Sustainable Digital Livelihoods “: With 
limited resources on the one side and a clear set of sustainability goals in the 2030 Agenda 
we need to focus and redirect investments, guidelines and further means towards pressing 
sustainable development ends. A Global Innovation Mechanism would support open 
innovations, but deliberately steer funds, investments and regulatory support towards 
digital applications with a clear sustainability purpose, while encouraging the use of open 
source/software/AI to provide further global digital public goods for all. A Global 
Mechanism approach serves as an initially loose frontrunner approach of MS and other 
ambitious actors that should further solidify via own sets of national and international 
targets and timetables, capacity development programs and the creation of funds to steer 
digital sustainability solutions.   
 
D. COMMENTS ON GDC 
 
Sustainability and the 2030 Agenda must become the guiding vision and mission for the entire 
GDC, that is then clearly specified with a set of relevant principles and concrete actions, e.g. for 
most pressing issue areas like capacities, sustainable infrastructures, and solutions for climate 
action, circularity or biodiversity protection.  
 
 
4 Imprint 
Publisher   
Umweltbundesamt 
Wörlitzer Platz 1 
06844 Dessau-Roßlau 
Tel: +49 340-2103-5046 
marcel.dorsch@uba.de 
Internet: www.umweltbundesamt.de 
/umweltbundesamt.de 
/umweltbundesamt 
  
Completion: Arpil/2023   
 