 
UNCLASSIFIED / PUBLIC  
 
Global Digital Compact  
Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands  
Date 28 April 2023  
Status  FINAL  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 3 of 14 • Colophon  
Version  Final 
Location  The Hague, The Netherlands  
Project manager(s)   
Contact  Jacco -Pepijn Baljet  
Senior policy officer Cyber  
dvb-cyber@minbuza.nl  
Directorate for Security Policy  
   
   
  
  
  
  
Enclosure(s)   
  
Author(s)   
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 4 of 14 Table of Contents  
• Colophon  ..................................................................................................... 3 
• Introduction  ................................................................................................ 5 
1 Connect  all people to the Internet, including all schools ............................. 6 
1.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................... 6 
1.2 Key commitments  .......................................................................................... 6 
2 Avoid internet fragmentation  ...................................................................... 7 
2.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................... 7 
2.2 Key commitments  .......................................................................................... 7 
3 Protect data  ................................................................................................ 8 
3.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................... 8 
3.2 Key commitments  .......................................................................................... 9 
4 Apply human rights online ........................................................................... 9 
4.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................... 9 
4.2 Key commitments  ........................................................................................ 10 
5 Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  ......................... 10 
5.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................. 10 
5.2 Key commitments  ........................................................................................ 11 
6 Promote regulation of artificial intelligence (AI)  ....................................... 12 
6.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................. 12 
6.2 Key commitments  ........................................................................................ 12 
7 Global Public Goods and Digital Commons ................................................. 12 
7.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................. 13 
7.2 Key commitments  ........................................................................................ 13 
8 Other topics –  linked to trusted connectivity  ............................................. 13 
8.1 Core principles  ............................................................................................. 13 
8.1.1  Digital trust and security  ............................................................................... 13 
8.1.2  Sustainability  ............................................................................................... 13 
8.2 Key commitments  ........................................................................................ 14 
8.2.1  Digital trust and security  ............................................................................... 14 
8.2.2  Sustainability  ............................................................................................... 14 
 
  
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 5 of 14 • Introduction  
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the open and transparent way in 
which the process of the Global Digital Compact has been designed and 
calls for continuing this inclusive approach in which all interested and relevant stakeholders are heard. In a similar spirit, we  have included the 
Dutch internet community in the process of writing our national contribution.  This submission is fully in line with the submission made by 
the European Union.  
Due to the nature of the Internet, the incremental and valuable role of civil society, academia, the private sector as well as governments should always be considered. In that regard, the Netherlands strongly suggests to take into account the valuable outc omes of established processes, such as the 
conclusions of the Tunis Agenda and the WSIS+10 review which confirmed the multistakeholder model for Internet governance, the Messages of the Internet Governance Forum and Leadership Panel. Also the Global Digita l 
Compact should underline the importance of a n international  
multistakeholder platform, such as the annual Internet Governance Forum, to regularly debate Internet governance issues. The Global Digital Compact 
should explicitly build on and reinforce other commitments such as  the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals. We must guard against duplication of ongoing UN processes, in particular topics which are currently being discussed in the First and Third Committee.  
 In outline, the Dutch contribution to the GDC focuses on:  
• Bridgi ng the digital 'divide', including promoting access and 
digital skills for women and girls, youth, groups or individuals in vulnerable situations, indigenous peoples, the elderly and persons with disabilities and special needs;  
• Reaffirming and strengthe ning the multistakeholder model of 
internet governance;  
• Strengthening linkages between human rights aspects and technical aspects of the standards development process;   
• Mitigating the negative impact of (mass) surveillance, microtargeting, disinforma tion campaigns and internet 
shutdowns;  
• Encouraging and emphasising the importance of 'Data free flow 
with trust', online privacy, online anonymity, confidentiality of 
electronic communications and strong encryption;  
• Promoting international regulation  of new and emerging 
technologies, with a human rights -based approach and assurance 
of the design, development, deployment, evaluation and use of technologies, platforms and tools.  
  
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 6 of 14 1 Connect  all people to the Internet, including all schools  
1.1 Core principles 
 
Increasing digitalization must not lead to exacerbated or reinforced inequality. To 
capitalize on the opportunities of the digital transition and to avoid or mitigate the risks involved, investments in digital infrastructure,  universal access,  digital 
inclusion, digital literacy and cyber security , including priv acy, are of utmost 
importance. This digital transition must be underpinned by human rights safeguards to ensure the stability of societies and their economies. Increasing knowledge and skills to safeguard and protect the digital environment  as a foundation for 
sustainable d evelopment  is urgent and essential . Different levels of capacity among 
states might lead to a weaker resilience for all in our interconnected world.  
 Bridging the digital divide requires more than providing infrastructure and hardware. 
To foster digital in clusion and access to a safe digital environment  we need to invest 
in the development of digital skills, such as digital literacy, the use of digital devices, 
communication applications, etc. This is  in line with the UNSG’s Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation.  Focus should also be given to d igital education  to ensure  equity and 
inclusion. The education community, in particular teachers, should be adequately 
trained, skilled and equipped to incorporate technology effectively , ethically  and 
responsibly in their teaching methods, and should also be enabled to teach digital 
technologies to ensure that students are better equipped to enter the labour market. Innovations in educational technology (EdTech) can give otherwise 
excluded children access to high -quality education.  
 Access to the Internet is also important for employment, especially youth 
employment. When  people have access to the Internet , they are more capable of 
actively participating in the digital economy . And for this, additional skills are 
required.  A report of the UN on the Human Development Index  (2019) shows that 
for schoolchildren to participate in a digital society, advanced capabilities are 
needed. Such as problem solving skills, critical thinking skills and the ability to work 
in a team. Education and training are essential for broad personal development as 
well as to respond to the changing job market, to exploit the opportunities 
presented by digitalisation and to promote inclusiveness. Greater commitment to 
improving wom en’s digital skills is crucial in pushing back on the widening gender 
gap on the international labour market.  
 
1.2 Key com mitments  
 
Not being able to participate in the digital society magnifies inequality. Bridging this digital divide requires joint efforts fr om multiple parties, both on a national and an 
international level. Therefore,  we are collaborating with public, private and civil 
society partners in order to make the Netherlands more digitally proficient and ensuring that everyone can (continue to) participate digitally, safely and healthily. 
At an international level, we collaborate on a diverse portfolio of projects. Via the 
EU’s Global Gateway we support interco ntinental initiatives focused on the 
accessibility and reliability of the digital environment, such as the installation of sub -
marine cables between Europe, Africa and Latin America to increase the speed and accessibility of the internet. We reaffirm our c ommitment to working with the 
international community to close digital divides, including the gender digital divide . 
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 7 of 14 The Global Digital Compact should call upon all Member States to connect all the 
unconnected, with a critical emphasis on women and girls, youth and vulnerable 
groups, indigenous peoples, the elderly, and persons with disabilities and specific 
needs.   
 
The Netherlands strives to break down  the gender digital divide entirely . While 
technological change and digitalization can accelerate progress for gender equality 
and the empowerment of all women  and girls, but also under -represented or 
marginalized groups , it can also exacerbate vulnerabilities, existing inequalities, 
gender stereotypes and discriminatory social norms with serious risks and 
implications . The gender digital divide persists  also in access to science, technology, 
engineering and math (STEM) education.  This year’s theme of International Women 
Day “DigitALL: Innovation and technology for gender equality”  underlined the 
importance of this topic.  The Global Digital Compact should include a commitment 
to achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls by enhancing education and participation in cyberspace as users, content creators, employees, 
entrepreneurs, innovators and leaders.  
  
2 Avoid internet fragment ation  
2.1 Core principles  
The multistakeholder model of Internet  governance has been instrumental in 
maintaining an open,  free, secure,  interoperable, decentralized and resilient global 
Internet  infrastructure. Restrictions of and on the Internet  may threaten the global , 
open, free and secure nature of cyberspace, as well as the rule of law and human 
rights and fundamental freedoms, which apply offline as well as online. In order to 
preserve and i mprove the multistakeholder model, meaningful participation from all 
stakeholders  on equal footing, should be guaranteed in Internet organisations and 
platforms as ICANN, IETF, IGF and further encouraged in ITU . An important positive 
effect of the multistakeholder model is that no stakeholder group has the sole 
responsibility to manage the internet or possibility to influence the functioning of the 
internet substantially.  Especially  participation  from global majority countries and 
from under -represented or marginalized groups, should be encouraged.  
 
The Global Digital Compact should address Internet  fragmentation on two layers: 
the technical layer  and the user experience or application layer . At the same time, 
the diversity and decentr alization  of the Internet  infrastructure , in contrary to 
decoupling, should not be mistaken for fragmentation. These are core characteristics 
that underly the very nature of the Internet  and support its resilience and its 
flexibility to ad apt to changing circumstances.  
2.2 Key commitments  
 The Global Digital Compact should reaffirm and strengthen  the mu ltistakeholder -
model of Internet governance. Participation on equal footing in the Internet  
organisations is instrumental in keeping the global internet open, free, secure, interoperable, decentralized and resilient . 
      
The G lobal Digital Compact  should commit to avoiding a fragmentation of the 
technical infrastructure  of the Internet , impeding the ability of systems to 
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 8 of 14 interoperate, and threatening the general integrity and availability of the core 
Internet  infrastructure. This includes packet ro uting and forwarding, naming and 
numbering systems, encryption  [technologies] , and the underlying physical 
infrastructures .  
 
A key feature of the open, free, secure and interoperable Internet  is the free flow of 
information, which enables development, all ows all to benefit optimally from access 
to the Internet and e mpowers individuals to exercise their universally applicable 
human rights, such as the freedom of expression . National and international policies 
and legislation  that hamper, limit or block inte rnet access , in ways not aligned with 
international human rights law, even if they are adopted with best intentions, should 
be avoided by taking a holistic approach to the protection and promotion of human 
rights  and fundamental freedoms.  Governmental Internet shutdowns have a 
disproportionately negative impact on human rights, economic welfare and 
innovation and could be avoided by taking alternative measures to address disinformation or other harmful content online in line with universally established 
principles such as necessity, proportionality,  and legality. The Global Digital 
Compact  should therefore commit to refrain from government -imposed Internet  
shutdowns.  
  
3 Protect d ata 
3.1 Core principles  
The adequate protection of personal data is a key enabler of enhancing trus t in the 
digital ecosystem. Users of digital technologies should be able to have full 
confidence that their personal data are processed and stored in a safe and secure 
way, not accumulated in an unlawful manner, and only accessed by those with the 
permissi on to do so. Maintaining the confidentiality, integrity and availability of 
personal and non -personal data is vital in this regard , including through the use of 
encryption . This way individuals have enhanced control over their (sensitive) 
personal data,  and the trusted use of digital technologies is promoted.  
 
Key principles for the protection of personal data online are the following: 1) 
Lawfulness, fairness,  and transparency; 2) Purpose limitation; 3) Data minimization; 
4) Accuracy; 5) Storage limitat ion; 6) Integrity and confidentiality; 7) 
Accountability.  
 These principles could be underpinned by an appropriate (national) legal framework, 
which adds to legal clarity and certainty  for both users and businesses . While at the 
same time ensuring that cr oss border free flow of data should be possible to 
facilitate digital trade and development of a digital economy.  For instance, countries 
could criminalize the interception and interference with computer data  without a 
legal basis and  when committed intent ionally. Also, a commitment to the once -only 
principle, which states that citizens should not be forced to provide information to 
authorities if another authority already holds that information in electronic format,  
could be encouraged by fostering public administrations to re -use data, where 
possible and in accordance with the data protection rules, so that no additional burden falls on citizens or businesses. Governments, businesses and product 
designers themselves should also take into account these prin ciples and work from a 
basis of privacy -by-design when developing new products and technologies.  
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 9 of 14 3.2 Key commitments  
 
Proportionate  and secure sharing of data, including through cloud services, is and 
will be a vital component of a thriving digital economy. For this to materialize, it is 
important to have a strong data protection framework in place. T he Compact could 
include a commitm ent to collaborate on the interoperability of such national 
frameworks, such as the  “Data Free Flow with Trust”1 framework with the additional 
mention ing of the importance of online privacy, online anonymity, confidentiality of 
electronic communication an d strong encryption.  Localization requirements, to 
process and store data locally,  could actually lead to  restrictions on data flows and  
inadvertently undermine privacy and security of data while  hurting economic 
development.  The negotiations in the WTO Jo int Statement Initiative about e -
commerce could offer an example of compromises of how to ensure cross border 
data flows while at the same time respecting countries ’ policy objectives, like 
protection of personal data and privacy.  
 
 
4 Apply human rights online  
4.1 Core princi ples 
 It must be recognized that international law, including international human rights  
law, applies equally offline as it does online. Human rights, such as the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) , the International Convention on 
Economic and Social Rights (ICESR ), the Convention on the Elimination of all forms 
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW ) and the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child do therefore apply in the digital domain. Given the rapid technological 
developments and to create transparency and coherence  around the application of 
the normative framework for responsible State behaviour , the question States 
should (continue to) address is how human rights law applies.  The Compact  can 
play an important role, for instance as a catalyst  for these discussion, stimulating  a 
united approach for the se protection of human rights online.  
 Besides states, companies also have a responsibility to respect human rights online. 
The responsibility that companies have is laid down in, among others, the OECD 
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the UN Guiding Principles on Business 
and Human Rights  (UNGPBHR) . However,  existing commitments , such as the 
UNGPBHR , need updating to  equally protect and promote human rights online and 
offline.  
 
Emerging technologies can strengthen democratic institutions and democratic 
resilience, but at the same time they pose serious challenges to the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights, both online and offline. The Netherlands 
recognizes the importance of sustainable support to civil society organisations and 
women human rights defenders in particular who strive to protect and promote human rights and gender equality in the digital sph ere. Women human rights 
defenders are more often at risk of threats and attacks, and their activities 
hampered by Internet restrictions and shutdowns.  
 
 
1 https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Data_Free_Flow_with_Trust_2022.pdf  
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 10 of 14 Technical standards provide a common language that can  enhance trust, security, 
and interoperability. St andardisation  in the digital domain  takes place in  a broad 
spectrum of  multilateral and multistakeholder organisations, including but not 
limited to ISO/IEC, IEEE, 3GPP, IETF, W3C, ITU, sector specific international 
organisations such as ICAO, IMO and lots  of regional and private collaborations.  The 
standards these bodies produce and the way those standards get implemented and adopted often provide ways to protect fundamental rights, but choices in the development of standards or during implementation can a lso inflict harm on human 
rights.   
4.2 Key commitments  
 
Human rights  and fundamental freedoms  should be reinforced throughout the GDC  
and a commitment to gender equality, non -discrimination and strong attention to 
marginalized groups should be integral to the C ompact as a whole. The incremental 
role of the UN Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights  as leading entity in 
the UN on human rights should be acknowledged, as well as the relevance of 
existing commitments, such as the UNGPBHR and the Beijing Platform for Action .  
 
As technical standards are at the core of the development and use of existing and 
emerging technologies, human rights and gender e quality should be taken into 
account in the standard -setting process to ensure the application of human rights 
online and offline , including  the development  and implementation  of standards. 
Standards should be consistent with international human rights law, respect 
fundamental freedoms and promote gender equality.  The Netherlands calls for 
stronger linkages between the human rights and technical angle of standards 
development . We recognize the value of the continuation and  intensification of the 
involvement of all stakeholders  in the standardization process, including human 
rights experts . The Compact  should  acknowledge the fact that ‘technical’ standard s 
development  processes are not merely technical, but can have an impact on the 
promotion and pr otection of human rights .  
 The Compact  should include a commitment to combat all forms of discrimination 
online, with a specific attention to multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination, 
including on grounds of sex, race, ethnic or social origin, religion or belief, political 
or any othe r opinion, disability, age, sexual orientation and gender identity. Also the 
negative consequences of (mass) surveillance, microtargeting, disinformation  
campaigns and online gender -based violence should be addressed.   
 
Moreover, the C ompact  could  include the use of the Universal Periodic Review to 
address recommendations to States , such as those regarding  the protection of 
human rights of women and girls online . Clear focus should be on the strengthening  
of an open, free, secure and interoperable Internet  that is a safe and trusted space 
for everyone  through a multistakeholder model. Within this model the Freedom 
Online Coalition and the signatories of the  Declaration for the F uture of the I nternet  
could b e mentioned as  relevant actor s.  
 
5 Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
5.1 Core principles  
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 11 of 14 The Netherlands is committed to maintaining an open, free, secure, global, 
interoperable and reliable Internet. An Internet on which platforms regulate their 
content within the boundaries of democratic values, the rule of law, and in line with 
international human rights law. Despite all the social and economic benefits digitalization brings, it also entails risks and can be a facilitator of illegal content and 
activities, as well as harmful content.  
 
Law enforcement, judicial oversight and cooperation with various stakeholders, 
including platforms and Internet Service Providers, therefore needs to be effective 
and legitimate. Key principles are: 1) respect for human rights, 2) lawfulness or legality, 3) proportionality, necessity and subsidiarity, 4) right to a fair trial and an 
effective right to remedy. For law enforcement to be successful, proportionate and 
trusted, cooperation with service providers is crucial, and whole -of-society 
prevention efforts for civilians and private entities are necessary. Only when citizens 
are safe to enjoy their rights a nd freedoms and when businesses can deploy 
commercial activities in a safe environment we can continue to reap the benefits of the digital age.  
 It is important that illegal content such as discriminatory or racist statements or 
child sexual abuse and exp loitation material is removed from the Internet. 
Combating illegal content is both a task for Internet service providers, platforms as 
well as for the competent regulators. All of them will need to act adequately and 
transparently, with clear (appeal) proc edures for users whose content has been 
removed.  
 For addressing harmful, but not illegal or unlawful (awful but lawful) content, the 
initiative lies mostly with the online platforms. Platforms can formulate and apply 
their terms of use in such a way that they can counter content that they find undesirable. This could also include misleading content and disinformation. But 
when applying this, these platforms will need to pay attention to international 
human rights law (including freedom of expression), incl uding the UNGPBHR, and 
the legitimate interests of all stakeholders involved, including the users of the 
service.  
5.2 Key commitments  
 
The Netherlands is aware of calls for  international standards in tackling harmful 
content online and e mphasizes  the importance of these being anchored in human 
rights  obligations . Setting international standards for tackling harmful online content 
is especially challenging when it co mes to unwanted, but not illegal, content. This is 
a complicated consideration where freedom of expression is the starting point and 
weighs particularly heavy, but where also tech platforms have significant freedom to 
determine for themselves what the term s of use of their services are.  
 
The GDC should include commitments to strengthen the involvement of platforms 
and tech companies in shaping international standards around content moderation and governance. Civil society organizations and researchers are also conducting 
research into the (unintended) effects of such policies. Only with and through 
multistakeholder  engagement  can it be ensured that address ing harmful  content is 
technically possible, feasible and enforceable  and meets existing human rights 
obligations .  
 
According to the Netherlands content moderation must be done on terms that are 
publicly known and understandable. Where platforms remove or otherwise moderate 
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 12 of 14 unwanted, but not illegal content based on their terms of use, this must be done 
transparently and ensure that objections or appeals can be made. Furthermore, 
under the EU’s Digital Services Act online platforms  must clearly motivate their 
decisions to remove content . The GDC should therefore include commitments on 
transparency of content moderation criteria on platforms, which can be done in 
transparency reports. Transparency reports should provide clarity on th e approach 
to both unlawful as well as harmful content.  
 Compliance with this obligation should  be subject to independent supervision.  The 
Netherlands is committed to compliance with the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights by tec h companies.  
  
6 Promote regulation of artificial intelligence (AI ) 
6.1 Core prin ciples  
 
It is important to recognise the potential of new and emerging technologies to bridge 
the digital divide  between and w ithin countries,  and benefit people and the planet by 
driving inclusive growth, sustainable development and well- being. However, they can 
also a mplify inequalities and stereotypes, and can cause harm, particularly to persons 
in vulnerable situations and marginalised groups. The Netherlands calls for a gender-
responsive and human rights -based approach to the design, development, 
deployment, evaluat ion and use of technologies, platforms and tools (incl. AI and AI -
based solutions) to ensure that (gender and racial) inequalities, stereotypes and biases are prevented and eradicated. Therefore, it is essential to promote international regulation of new and emerging technologies, focusing on a design that 
respects international law, including  human rights  law, the rule of law, democratic 
values, gender equality and diversity . Important safeguards, such as o versight and 
enforcement mechanisms should be in p lace to ensure  accountability and liability.  
6.2 Key commitments  
 
In the field of AI, the European Union is a key partner in developing a human  rights -
based approach. It has adopted and implemented several initiatives in this regard, 
such as the EU 's AI Act and the Council of Europe’s Convention on Artificial 
Intelligence (CAI). The Global Digital Compact provides an opportunity to bring this 
approach to the United Nations. The success of UNESCO's Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence  indica tes the importance of such an approach and 
gives us a foundation on which to build. By setting up an inclusive, multistakeholder process of international cooperation, the Global Digital Compact could create a framework for promoting the responsible use of AI while taking the interests of all 
stakeholders into account. The framework should address topics such as 
discrimination, privacy, transparency and explainability by and  of AI. This could 
contribute positively to the overall goal of closing the digital d ivide and enabling 
equitable access to the benefits of AI while mitigating the risks.  
  
7 Global Public Goods and Digital Commons  
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 13 of 14 7.1 Core prin ciples  
 
Digital Public Goods (DPG) are crucial for inclusive, sustainable development and 
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in the context of lower - 
and middle- income countries. The DPG Standard of the DPG Alliance2 should be 
used as the standard to determine whether a digital solution conforms to the definition of a digital public good: open -source software, open data, open AI models, 
open standards, and open content that adhere to privacy and other applicable best practices, do no harm by design and are crucial  for attainment of the United Nations 
2030 Sustainable Development Goals.  Digital commons are a separate category of 
goods that can also have great impact on realising the SDG’s. The EU ’s experience 
with digital commons  projects such as the European Digital Infrastructure Consortia 
as part of the Digital Decade policy program could benefit the discussion on a common set of principles and standards.  The Netherlands has, together with other  
EU member states , shown interest in starting a  European Digital Infrastructure 
Consortium  to promote the development of digital commons within the EU.   
 
7.2 Key commitments  
 The Global Digital Compact should strive for agreeing on principles and standards as 
underlined in the UN’s road map: “Central to the implementation of  digital public 
goods are robust human rights and governance frameworks to enhance trust in 
technology and data use, while ensuring inclusion”. Moreover, the Compact should distinguish between digital commons and digital public goods, which both can play 
an important role for inclusive, sustainable development.  
 
 
8 Other topics  – linked to trusted connectivity  
8.1 Core principles  
8.1.1  Digital trust and security  
One key prerequisite is a trustworthy and secure digital environment for all, including women, youth and people from marginalized comm unities, that will 
support the achievement of the SDGs by 2030. It should be stressed that human rights and cybersecurity are complementary, mutually reinforcing and interdependent. Our daily lives, economic prosperity, and social progress, depend on 
a trusted and secure digital environment that is affordable, accessible, and reliable. 
Oftentimes cyberspace is the backbone to equitable access to nearly all essential 
services, many provided by governments, including food, water, energy, healthcare, 
financial  services as well as critical government functions, such as conducting 
elections. Security -by-design is therefore needed to embed cybersecurity in the core 
of the digital environment.  
8.1.2  Sustainability  
The Netherlands is committed to a sustainable digital transition, or twin transition. In light of the EU’s Fit for 55 package, the Compact should reflect that our digital 
transition needs to be systemically aligned with the sustainability transformation to ensure that the digital infrastructure is itself comp rehensively sustainable. 
 
2 https://digitalpublicgoods.net/who -we-are/#more  
 
 UNCLASSIFIED  | FINAL | Global Digital Compact  | Submission by the Kingdom of the Netherlands | 28 April 2023  
Page 14 of 14 Furthermore, we need to develop and use digital innovations as an accelerating 
force for advancing our sustainable development agenda.  
 
The aim of minimiz ing the environmental footprint of digital infrastructure, the 
internet and di gital technologies could be achieved in various ways, for instance by 
promoting green data centres and supporting the deployment of sustainable telecoms infrastructure. Furthermore, the sustainability of software should not be forgotten and we also need to ensure that the digital transformation is supported by 
sufficient clean energy. Lastly, the importance of cross -border transfer of knowledge 
and experience should be emphasized, e.g. the fusion of innovative ecosystems.  
8.2 Key commitments  
8.2.1  Digital trust and security  
The transnational and cross -cutting impacts of digital technologies require universal 
approaches that go beyond geographical borders and traditional siloes. Cyber capacity -buildin g efforts are urgent and essential to safeguard and protect the 
digital environment as a foundation for sustainable development. We need to better understand the challenges faced by marginalized or disadvantaged groups and 
commit to supporting their paths towards improving internet access, manage digital 
risks and mitigate their impact. We will need an inclusive approach by states and other stakeholders, including private sector, civil society and academia, that takes 
into account existing initiatives, shar e best practices on building resilient digital 
networks and focus on practical capacity building efforts in this area.  
8.2.2  Sustainability  
In order to make these developments possible, unilateral government action is not sufficient. The Compact should therefore reflect the need for collaboration between governm ents and private actors in the digital sector, but also international 
collaboration between governments. Standardisation of sustainability factors, harmonization of policy instruments and better transparent reporting is important, but also the use of bindi ng instruments should be seen as a viable option in ensure 
a clean digital transition.  