1 
 Input from the Government of the Republic of Poland t o the Global Digital Compact  
 
Introduction  
The Government of the Republic of Poland express es its deepest appreciation to the U nited Nations  
Secretary -General  (UN SG), H.E. Mr. António Guterres  for preparing the SG’s report „Our Common 
Agenda”. This document presents a set of guiding recommendations to develop the joint programme 
and respond to current and future challenges.  The Polish Government is fully commi tted to continuing 
our active involvement in the UN Internet Governance Forum  and other related initiatives.  
The visible aspect of Poland’s engagement in this process is the co -organization of the first fully virtual 
IGF in 2020 and the hosting of the UN IGF 2021 in Katowice  under the overarching theme „Internet 
United”, held also for the first time  in a fully hybrid mode . This event  held  betw een 6 and 10 December 
2021 gathered more than 10 ,000 people from 175 countries worldwide , with almost 200 ministers and 
other high -level guests . For 5 days, we talked about the most important issues in the digital space: 
from the regulation of platforms, t he role of digitization in a pandemic , and the impact on global 
economic development, to cyber security and users' rights online. Throughout the entire week ,  
39 remote local hubs from countries ranging from Côte d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo,  
Bolivia, Colombia, Haiti , and Venezuela to Malaysia and India participated. We also had a very good 
outreach, including 50,000 social interactions with the hashtag #IGF2021 and a  reach of 5 million 
people, and more than 2 0,000 views of online sessions.  
Yet the most tangible output is the Katowice IGF Messages , a 7 -pager document that summarises 
conclusions from over 300 sessions, presenting a positive vision for the future of the Internet, which 
combines fundamental values such as human rights, access , and openness, as w ell as economic 
considerations.  
Based on this outcome paper and on actions already undertaken by the Polish Government, please 
find below Poland’s  input to the Global Digital Compact  (GDC) . On a general ground,  we have a  unique  
chance to change the old paradigm of information society as a set of users being sources of data in 
favour of a new paradigm of knowledge society as interactive actors having the ability to empower 
their creativity, possibility to commercialise the result s of their work. The GDC could play a  vital role in 
defining the scope of actions regarding the upcoming WSIS+20 review process, including the updated 
IGF multistakeholder model. Poland stands ready to work closely with all stakeholders, in  particular 
the co -facilitators from Rwanda and Sweden, on shaping and implementing the GDC for the benefit of 
the global digital community. We will be more than happy to share our experience and present our 
feedback regar ding the below -mentioned input.  
1. E-skills, and c onnect ing all people to the Internet, including all schools  
The current state of play:  
By building the digital competences of citizens and thus bridging the digital divide and other digital 
inequalities , every country is contributing to the dev elopment of digital democracy, as well as the 
digital economy. Therefore, the Polish Government focuses its actions on th ree main pillars: 1. digital 
2 
 education  of the youngest, 2. re -skilling of the adults, taking into account the needs of the business ,  
3. support for elderly people, who are often digitally excluded.  
In the context of training and the acquisition of new skills, we should also bear in mind the reference 
to new human -machine relationships, illustrated by the exponentially increasing use of  generative 
artificial intelligence networks used among others in large -scale language models (LLMs). IT training 
emerges from the area of being able to operate or program a specific device or business process. 
It should enable interaction with these syste ms in the process of creating added value.  
In addition, the Polish Government invest s in the construction of high -speed  fiber -optic  
telecommunication networks to eliminate white gaps in Internet access, so that citizens can work, 
communicate or use numerous public e -services without problems. Poland is currently a construction 
site for modern telecommunications networks – broadband investments amount to more than 
100,000 km of new internet  networks.  
Key commitments and pledges:  
Poland’s  main goal is to provide universal  access to ultra -fast internet, develop digital competences 
for schoolchildren , and support digital education based on modern technologies so that they can 
navigate safely in  virtual reality and understand and better interpret the content they encounter there. 
We focus on e -inclusion, understood not only to encourage the use of the Internet, the acquisition of 
digital competences , and the removal of digital barriers but more b roadly as a form of mobilization 
and empowerment aimed at removing various forms of exclusion. All of these activities are part of the  
recently adopted , by resolution of the Council of Ministers on February 21, 2023, the Digital 
Competence s Development Pro gram until 2030. Present ed below are Poland’s other impor tant 
activities in these areas.  
1. Development of digital education – we have  taken numerous measures to level the playing 
field and to implement solutions aimed at democratising access to new technologies used in 
the education process. We have done that in different areas :  
➢ infrastructure – exampl es: 1. National Education Network (OSE), which enables schools to 
access the internet with a symmetrical bandwidth of at least 100 Mbps along with 
advanced cyber security services – more than 90% (over 20 000 schools ) already 
connected . OSE also received internat ional recognition, being awarded the prestigious 
WSIS Prize 2018 ; 2. 100,000 classrooms in schools equipped with LAN connection (by Q3 
2025);  
➢ equipment – examples: future  planning that  every fourth -grader  shall  receive their  own 
laptop  – at least 735,000 additional portable computers with the necessary software  are 
expected  to be supplied to schools for use by pupils  (by Q3 2025). In addition, at least 
465,000 additional portable computers are to be supplied for  teachers ’ usage (by Q3 
2023); 2. 100 ,000 classrooms in vocational schools and general education institutions 
equipped with IT tools to enable remote teaching (by Q3 2025) ; 3. Laboratories of the 
Future – they aim  to support all primary schools in building future competences among 
pupils in t he so -called STEAM subjects (science, technology, engineering, arts , and 
mathematics) – as a result, 99% of local government primary schools in Poland have been 
equipped with modern equipment, including 3D printers, VR goggles, robots, 
3 
 microcontrollers, mo dern recording studios and technical equipment of all kinds – from 
September 2022, these schools are being visited by teams of Mobile Future Laboratories 
to support the process of using these solutions in each region.  
2. Connecting all households with high -speed internet – since 2015 the population coverage of 
services of at least 30 Mb/s has grown from 53 to 76%, especially thanks to public interventions 
which consider up to 2.2 million households.  
3. Supporting the elderly and persons with disabilities – examples: 1. as part of the Farmer’s 
Wives’ Associations  programme, we have donated computer equipment, workshops , and 
training to improve the digital competences of more than 100 Farmer’s Wives’ Associations  
across Poland ; 2. The Digital Senior Clubs – aimed at equipping with workstations to improve 
the digital competences of seniors; 3. we have adopted an amendment to the law on web 
accessibility of websites  and mobile applications  to ensure that websites and applications o f 
public institutions could also be used more effectively by people with disabilities.  
2. Avoid Internet fragmentation  
The current state of play:  
Poland strongly advocates for an open, undivided,  free, global , secure , and resilient Internet. As the 
host country of the UN IGF 2021, we chose “Internet United” for its overarching theme . It reflects the 
positive vision of the Internet as a meeting point, a modern virtual agora, where people can exchange 
their views and experien ce. We also very much support the Internet as a digital space that enables  
a global online debate , which can be described by the IGF model – as multistakeholder, collaborative, 
equitable , and inclusive. To sum up, Poland opts for an inclusive and affordable Internet for all, where 
everyone is welcome and nobody is excluded . Moreover, unrestricted access to the open Internet is 
key for bridging the digital divide, as well as fostering democracy and human rights.  One must also n ot 
forget that the Internet is a place where generations meet and exchange their valuable knowledge and 
expertise. Young people have a special role to play here . 
Key commitments and pledges:  
A dedicated youth track  proposed by Poland for the UN IGF 2021  was very successful and delivered 
interesting outcomes.  We strongly believe that voices originating from the community of young users 
are crucial in every debate on Internet -related issues, especially Internet govern ance. As present  users 
of this ecosystem , they will soon become leaders taking responsibility for the digital environment and 
shaping its future frameworks. Therefore, we underline the importance of initiatives involving young 
people, especially through th e Youth IGFs. Moreover, we highlight the necessity to bring young 
representatives to the table, for instance by establish ing a global network of Youth Digital 
Ombudspersons, as stated in the Katowice UN IGF 2021 Messages.  
3. Protect data  
The current state of play:  
The data -based economy is changing the existing development principles. This is a great opportunity 
for many companies and the economy, as these new solutions and services are being developed and 
4 
 implemented recently. It is much easier to build up on e's position in a new, just emerging industry. 
This means that society in this new field can stop being just a consumer of what others invent and 
rather become a set of creators of new solutions. Poland supports the preservation of cultural heritage 
throug h i.a. making digital copies and digitally remastering cultural media. Poland  also support s the 
development of the project  that would enable sharing of non-personal data in a trusted and 
interoperable environment.  In addition, we are against introducing the right of ownership of non -
personal data  and instead opt for protecting rights of access to data, trade secrets, intellectual 
property, as wel l as privacy and personal data.  
Key commitments and pledges:  
The Polish Government  has been  implementing a project called KRONIK@ - the National Repository of 
Objects of Science and Culture, to collect and make available in one place the resources of Poland's 
national heritage in the fields of science, culture , and administration. The repository and the platform  
(kronika.gov.pl) integrat ing existing collections and introduc ing uniform standards for managing digital 
data, make it possible to protect valuable resources from destruction or loss and to ensure their 
security. The resource archive space  offered is free of charge for all institutions offering cultural and 
scientific data. The portal has been designed and reasonably modified to meet the needs of people 
with disabilities.  
Another project worth mentioning is called National Data Storage.  It aims to create a modern 
architecture  for storing and sharing data as well as  for efficient processing of large volumes of data in 
HPC, Big  Data , and artificial intelligence models . The project strives to achieve open, modular, 
extensible, decentralised , and scalable data  storage, with a range of  access interfaces and integrated 
services (including mechanisms to facilitate efficient  storing and access to  data ). 
4. Apply & respect human rights online  
The current state of play:  
We believe that human rights  must be protected both offline, as well as online.  Poland considers 
respecting human rights online as a key issue in developing digital democracy. The issue of respect for 
internat ional law and human rights was one of Poland's priorities during the two -year non -permanent 
membership of the U N Security Council (2018 -2019).  We also believe tha t it relates to the design of 
national ICT systems and application software in a manner that ensures respect for human rights.  They 
should also be consistent with the terms of use and the method of enforcing these rules on users .  
Key commitments and pledges:  
At the end of December 2022, the Polish Council of Ministers adopted the "Position of the Republic of 
Poland on the application of international law in cyberspace". In this document , Poland fully confirm s 
that international human rights law applies to cyberspace. We particularly state that freedom of 
expression and the right to privacy re quire special protection in cyberspace. With this in mind, Poland 
agrees that protecting international human rights law concerning  cyberspace requires action for an 
open and secure Internet. We believe that respect for sovereignty in cyberspace cannot be a n excuse 
to violate international human rights law. In addition, effective protection of human rights requires 
that the state refrains itself from unjustified interference with the rights and freedoms exercised on 
5 
 the Internet, and takes positive action in  certain circumstances to ensure effective realisation and 
protection of human rights on the Internet.  
5. Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
The current state of play:  
Poland emphasis es issues related to ensuring cybersecurity and combatting cybercrime. Particularly, 
we focus on increasing general public knowledge and awareness of the scope of cybersecurity. Another 
important area is protecting children online. Poland is actively involve d in negotiations on the CSAM 
Regulation - Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down rules 
to prevent and combat child sexual abuse. We also set up a variety of public initiatives, aimed at 
increasing the digital s afety of pupils, enhancing responsible pupil activity in the digital environment, 
and promoting principles of digital hygiene and  the safe use of digital technologies.  We engage in 
securing critical infrastructure, as well as increasing digital skills in c ybersecurity. Last but not least, 
we concentrate our efforts on monitoring and combatting disinformation and misinformation  in 
various forms and through different means  while ensuring that freedom of speech is duly protected  
With the Russian aggression against Ukraine , the number of misleading content has drastically 
increased. The  Polish Government  acts towards identifying and eliminating this dangerous situation.  
Key commitments and pledges:  
By implementing the Republic of Poland's Cyber Se curity Strategy for the years 2019 -2024, Poland has 
strived to build a strong position in the area of cybersecurity. The main objective of the Strategy is to 
increase the level of resilience to cyber threats and the level of information protection in the p ublic, 
military , and private sectors. We enhance the competences of public administration and national 
cybersecurity systems, for example by organising a series of training dedicated to operators of 
essential services under the Cyber Security Cooperation Programme ( PWCyber ), as well as supporting 
local governments under the #CyberSafeSamorząd campaign of dedicated staff training. Poland has 
also created the  Cybersecurity Fund, which offers competitive salaries for qualified cybersecurity 
professionals in government. In addition, we have launched numerous initiatives to enhance a cyber -
secure  society. Th is include s: 1. education and information, including e -learning ( examples: The Cyber 
Lessons project, Safe in the Network project, “e-Pole can do”, the knowledge base on the gov.pl portal), 
2. research & development (example: #CyberMadeinPoland, the biggest IT -sec cluster in the CEE 
region gathering over 40  innovative cybersecurity companies and engaged in the export of innovative 
Polish technologies, education of the market, regulatory and certiﬁcation issues), 3. parental support  
activit ies (example: the mProtection application addressed to parents , which  facilitates the setting of 
rules, regarding Internet and app use, and gives access to information about child's activity on the 
device ). More over, when it comes to countering disinformation , the NASK Research Institute, monitor s 
disinformation activity on the Internet and reduc es the impact of disinformation ( for example: since 
the beginning of the Russian aggression against Ukraine, the NASK has deemed around 1600 online 
profiles suspicious, and 88% of these accounts shared messages that  were considered disinformation).  
Aside from that, the Polish government works on providing society with supporting tools that will help 
to identify  possible disinformation content . The Strategic Programme INFOSTRATEG  funds several  
6 
 competing projects that aim to build AI-based tools to detect and flag  such content . The systems 
should be able to track multiple popular systems of communication and information dissemination.   
6. Promote regulation of artificial intelligence  
The current state of play:  
AI will have a key impact on the industry, climate , environment, and society. Poland underlines that 
the human -centric approach should be at the core of developing AI, not the other way around. 
We believe that human oversight of AI systems and the protection of human autonomy should be the 
guiding principl e for each type of trustworthy AI.  This rule should apply not only to the design of AI 
systems but also to their entire life cycle. We are already successful in building such standards – the 
EU Ethical Framework for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence ('Tr ustworthy AI'). We also take an active 
part in the work of the OECD and the Global Partnership on AI. As part of the ethics by design for smart 
solutions, in the field of sustainability, there is a need to make revisions to the UN Agenda 2030 SDG 
to enable a cohesion of values, principles , and policy actions worked out in the Global Code of Ethics 
on Artificial Intelligence  approved by Member States of UNESCO . Any usage of AI in the aims of the UN 
Agenda 2030 SDG needs to have in the loop the dignity of every human , the well -being of society , and 
the prevention of harm, including the psycho -physical integrity of people. On the other hand, we must 
not forget about the benefits of AI for the modern digital economy and society. Therefore, we should 
bear i n mind that the profits brought about by AI technology should reach all citizens alike and not 
only those clustered in developed and densely populated areas. One of the key issues is the 
redefinition of education programs  and improving digital skills by im plementing AI systems. Another 
very important factor is the cybersecurity of AI, which  is critical to its success. It is also connected with 
the fact that citizens and the business community need to trust in this techno logy (cybersecurity by 
design).  
Key c ommitments and pledges:  
In July 2020 Poland adopted its “Artificial Intelligence Development Policy for the year 2020 and 
beyond”. It defines actions and goals for Poland in the short term (until 2023), medium term (till 2027) , 
and long term (after 2027). It aims to use AI research and development to increase innovation and 
productivity of the economy built on data, as well as to support citizens in the processes of 
transformation of the work environment and improvement of compe tences, taking into account the 
protection of human dignity, the autonomy of individuals, and ensuring conditions for fair competition. 
We focus our activities towards AI on six key areas: 1. society ( i.e. creating new professions, raising 
competences, ado pting friendly legislation on R&D, developing new economic models, removing 
obstacles , and strengthening legal readiness for market changes),  2. innovative companies 
(implementation of simple robotic solutions in enterprises generating savings and producti on 
efficiency, fostering cooperation between private companies and the public sector in the field of 
research and pilot projects, supporting the establishment of Polish AI companies), 3. science 
(popularizing the use of AI as a tool to support research wor k in all fields of science; providing adequate 
support to students interested in studying AI; adapting academic teaching methods to the needs of AI 
development), 4. education (incorporating theoretical and practical knowledge on the functioning of 
AI into the curriculum at all stages of education (from primary school to universities); ensuring 
availability of educational tools), 5. public sector (access to public data to allow Polish companies to 
7 
 build new AI solutions; improving the use of AI -based solutio ns by central and local government), 
6. international cooperation (strengthening cooperation on global and European levels; attracting 
international talent and innovative companies to invest in Poland). This Strategy perfectly 
complements AI initiatives at  the international level – the European Union, the OECD , UNESCO , or the 
Council of Europe. Moreover, in cooperation with selected universities, we are implementing a  project 
– Academy for Innovative Applications of Digital Technologies (AI Tech). It aims  to create a  model for 
the systemic education of high -level specialists in AI, machine learning , and cybersecurity.  
7. Digital commons as a global public good  
The current state of play:  
Poland fully supports and contributes to the creation of digital public commons. We believe that open 
data is a source of real benefit  and time savings  for citizens and the administration . Citizens, including 
entrepreneurs, can use public data resour ces to pursue their own goals and to develop their businesses 
or research. Our continuous actions towards the further opening of public data have resulted in making 
visible progress in the European data opening ranking. In 2017, Poland was ranked 23rd in E urope. 
Now, we came 3rd.  Poland also supports the preservation of cultural heritage through i.e. making 
digital copies and digital ly remastering cultural media.  
 
Key commitments and pledges:  
The Polish Government is currently implementing the Data opening program  for the years 2021 -2027. 
It covers key issues in data sharing and its management. Apart from public institutions, it can also be 
addressed to other entities, particularly local government units or private entities. The implementation 
of the Programme will contribute, inter alia, t o an increase in the supply and improvement in the 
quality of data available in the dane.gov.pl portal, which are necessary for  the development of 
innovative services, applications , and other products, including those for new technologies. We are 
increasin gly talking about opening up data in the media, on the Open Data Facebook profile , and at 
numerous events , including the annual international conference titled: ‘ The future is data ’. 
Moreover, the Polish Government is currently working towards adopting a P olicy on open access to 
publicly funded research data. These efforts are accompanied by extensive mapping of the Polish open 
science ecosystem and consultations  with leading experts in this field.  
8. Other  
Development of e -services for the benefit of society : 
The current state of play:  
Poland has been working on several  e-government projects to simplify the contact of citizens and 
companies with public administration. T he biggest challenge is to design public services in a way that 
is as intuitive as possible and that everyone, regardless of their level of digital competence s and 
disability -related barriers will be able to use it. We have been working on allowing all traditional 
personal documents such as plastic ID cards, d riving licenses, and school and student cards to be 
respected in Poland on an equal level with documents being available in an application. The successful 
8 
 development of these digital solutions will allow citizens to save time and access public administration 
services without any limitations. Moreover, digital services have facilitated the process of granting the 
Polish personal identification number (PESEL) to around 1,5 million  Ukrainian  citizens who arrived in 
Poland because of the war , allowing them to accommodate more easily in Poland  and to communicate 
with our public administration.  
Key commitments and pledges:  
Poland has implemented Gov.pl Gateway & Electronic Public Administration Platform (ePUAP) – 
a uniform and transparent information system containing all e -government services. Thanks to this 
solution, one can submit a request to obtain a copy of one’s marriage certifi cate , register the birth of 
a child, apply for an ID card , or report it was stolen or damaged. We also offer a wide range of services 
for drivers. For example, one can  check one’s  penalty points or see the entire history of a vehicle. 
To access e -services, one need s to confirm identity  either with an e -ID issued by a bank or by setting 
up a Trusted Profile, a free tool provided by the Polish administration (nearly 12,5 million  Polish citizens 
set up their Trusted Profiles so far, as well a s about  600,000 Ukrainian citizens achieved their Trusted 
Profile, too). Moreover, we have provided a free application for mobile devices called mCitizen, which 
offers the possibility to store personal identification documents, such as driving licences, o n 
smartphones. The popularity of the mCitizen app is growing. To date, w e have 9.5 million of its 
recorded downloads , and nearly half a million Ukrainian citizens have already installed the mCitizen  
too. 
In terms of higher education , Poland develops from 2011 the System called POL-on - the System of 
Information on Science and Higher Education – currently  its second version POL -on 2.0. It is  the 
broadest repository of data on Polish science and higher education. The data gathered in the System 
are used predominantly to shape evidence -based science and higher education policies. It is a valuable 
source of information for analysts, candidates for studies, scientists , and entrepreneurs.  
By using data from POL -on Poland has also implemented the Polish Graduate Tracking System – ELA. 
ELA allows us to verify the time of job search, earnings , and the unemployment rate of graduates  in 
individual fields of study, create rankings, and infographics , and track PhDs’ educational history.  
 
Efforts to enable connectiv ity to those in need : 
The current state of play:  
On the 24th of February 2022 , the Russian Federation carried out a military aggression against Ukraine. 
Poland , alongside other European States and NATO , has condemned the Russian Federation for 
violating the noble principles, purposes , and objectives enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations 
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as in the Declaration of Principles adopted by 
the World Summit on the Information Society.  Poland has recognis ed the significant losses in terms of 
telecommunic ation infrastructure  Ukraine has encountered due to  Russian aggression. This resulted  
in millions of people  being deprived of access to information and communication technologies.  
Key commitments and pledge s:  
In terms of support of telecommunications/digitalization, Poland provided Ukraine with the donation 
of Starlink Units and radio stations that has a direct impact on Ukraine’s  capacities in the cont ext of 
9 
 access to the Internet. For purposes of re -estab lishing IT capacities, Poland has provided Ukraine with 
the dona tion of Data Centres equipment . We believe such efforts are  a strong signal of solidarity with 
the Ukrainian citizens. They also help the i nternational community to prioritise underserved regi ons, 
countries , and populations, including those affected by aggressive and hostile actions.  