 
 
Submission of Inputs for the Global Digital Compact  
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)  
 
 
Global Digital Compact - General Comments:  
 
• UNESCO welcomes the President of the UN General Assembly ’s appointment of the 
Permanent Representatives of Rwanda and of Sweden as Co -facilitators to lead the 
intergovernmental process on the Global Digital Compact  (GDC)  and conduct the 
consultations with Member States and Stakeholders on the proposal a nd the 
development of the GDC.  
 
• UNESCO embraces  the initiative of the United Nations Secretary -General to propose 
a Global Digital Compact and recognizes the need for coherent and coordinated UN 
effort and process leading to the ‘Summit of the Future’ outc omes in 2024.  
 
• Along the ROAM principles (a human -Rights based, Open, Accessible, and 
Multistakeholder shaped digital environment) adopted by UNESCO ’s Member States,  
and the Ethics of AI principles included in the UNESCO Recommendation of Ethics of 
Artific ial Intelligence adopted by acclamation by the Member States in 2021,  
UNESCO appreciates the multistakeholder character of the consultations so far and 
calls for continued opportunities for multistakeholder engagement throughout the 
process of development  of the Global Digital Compact.  
 
• UNESCO emphasizes the need to foster a human -rights based, open, accessible, and 
multistakeholder shaped technological environment in the service of humankind 
through development and dissemination of knowledge, skills and ethical standards  
 
• UNESCO encourages GDC to adopt a gender perspective  to ensure equal access 
to information and technologies, and to promote inclusive and diverse participation in 
all mechanisms of the digital ecosystem, as well as integrate the Leave  No One 
Behind Agenda with specific measures for marginalized and vulnerable 
populations . 
 
• UNESCO considers that the digital transformation also includes the interaction 
between artificial intelligence, internet of things, the cloud, neurotechnology and ot her 
emerging technologies, and will continue shaping the way we work, learn, and engage 
with each other, and should also be reflected in the Global Digital Compact.  

• In times where digital is mainstreamed in all areas of life and across all fields of UN 
competence, the respective mandate s of and themes covered by UN Organizations 
must become the key anchor of digital initiatives.  
 
• UNESCO expresses the need to ensure consistency between existing multilateral fora 
and mechanisms, avoiding duplication and ensuring that efforts complement, build on 
and reinforce existing frameworks and successful activities, which have proven to be 
impactful.  
 
• Any new efforts proposed in the GDC should complement the broader UN digital 
cooperation landscape a lready established and should include all relevant players 
from the digital ecosystem.  
 
• UNESCO  has established a solid foundation and strong case to continue its role as a 
thought -leader , standard setter and capacity developer  on digital and can play an 
important advisory role for the GDC, especially in the consultation period before its 
adoption by UN Member States at The Summit of the Future.  
 
1. Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  
a) Core Principles  
 
• Center  the most marginalized . Connectivity and technology must be deployed to 
help close growing educational divides. Too often, they benefit privileged learners and 
educators first. We must recalibrate our policies, actions, and investments to centre 
learners m ost in need of opportunities. This will help bridge inequalities, spark needed 
innovation, and make solutions easier to ‘scale out’ to more privileged groups. Asking 
how approaches can work for refugees, for students with disabilities, for girls and 
women,  for teachers in remote areas, and for other underprivileged learners and 
educators needs to be a point of departure.  
• ROAM Principle of ‘Accessibility to All’ . The principle of Accessibility to All has 
technical, economic and social aspects. It reaches fa r beyond mere connectivity, for 
example, to include issues of affordability, content and capability. It is closely related 
within societies to the distribution of income and resources between women and men, 
poor and rich, rural and urban communities, langu age groups and ethnic minorities, 
and those affected by disability or marginalisation.  
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• Ensure connectivity reaches all individual learners . For connectivity to truly 
equalize educational opportunity, it needs to enable anytime, anywhere internet 
access for individual students and teachers. Connectivity initiatives should be guided 
by an ethic of inclusion and begin with those facing disadvant age. Efforts to assure 
connectivity reaches and follows learners and educators should be grounded in a 
rationale of educational equality. They must also be accompanied by expanded and 
improved digital skills training, so students and teachers can make prod uctive use of 
connections for education   
• Assure clear and affordable connectivity for education . Governments should 
consider mandating that internet and mobile service providers offer basic and easy -
to-understand ‘connectivity for education’ plans or credi ts at fixed or subsidized -rates. 
People who want a basic connectivity option to support education should be able to 
find it. As education becomes increasingly reliant on connectivity, it must progressively 
be folded into state commitments to provide free a nd inclusive quality public education.  
• Create conditions for gender -responsive digital learning environments for girls 
and women  who have missed out on education, including by investing in school 
infrastructure, the development of free, safe and accessible  digital public learning 
resources, with good -quality, multilingual and context -relevant educational content, 
and the training of teachers to use gender -responsive blended and hybrid learning 
methods and deliver digital skills training. Those modules shoul d also take into 
account reskilling and upskilling content, in order to equip women and girls  with skills 
relevant  to the emersion in society that is highly shaped by emerging technologies, 
based on the guidelines set out in the Policy Paper I’d blush if I could , published by 
UNESCO and partners in 2019.   
• Support digital open schooling models that integrate connectiv ity for schools, 
digital content covering all subject areas and appropriate grade levels, and digital 
competencies needed for online coaching and online social caring based on 
Guidelines for ICT in Education Policies and Masterplans, published by UNESCO in  
2022 .  
• Support cultural institutions  in the digitization of cultural content, including through 
the AI Ethics Recommendation . inventorying of museum collections, documentation 
and transmission in the digital environment . 
 
2. Avoid internet fragmentation  
a) Core Principles  
 
• ROAM Principle of Openness . The Internet should be open for all to develop or take 
advantage of its resources and opportunities in whatever ways seem most appropriate 
or valuable to them. Openness is concerned alike, therefore, with technical issues, 
markets, content, transparency and  trust in the Internet and Internet -enabled services, 
including issues such as open -source  software and development, open government, 
open data and open educational resources. Through openness, Internet Universality 
acknowledges the integrity of the Intern et as enabling a common global exchange, 
rather than being confined to ‘walled gardens’ based on incompatible technologies.   
• ROAM Principle of Human Rights . Internet Universality emphasises the importance 
of harmony between the growth and use of the Intern et and human rights. A free 
Internet is one that respects the human rights set out in key international agreements 
and enables people to enjoy and exercise them fully. It includes the full range of inter -
relationships between human rights and the Internet,  such as freedoms of expression 
and association, privacy, cultural participation, gender equality, security and rights 
concerned with education, employment and welfare.  
  
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• Technology  developers  should base their approach on open standards, 
interoperability, and an open and distributed architecture consistent with Human 
Rights, and its governance should promote open standards, informed by individual 
and collective expertise and decisions that all ow for a resilient, stable, decentralized, 
secure, and interconnected network that is available to all.    
• Governments  should refrain from disproportionate measures, particularly prior 
censorship and internet shutdowns, under the guise of combatting disinfo rmation or 
any other reason inconsistent with the ICCPR.   
• Judicial Systems  should apply international human rights standards in their decisions 
regarding the internet ecosystem, avoiding a fragmented approach that can have 
implications to the protection of  fundamental freedoms and to the architecture of 
internet.  
  
3. Protect data  
a) Core Principles  
 
• High -Level Principles for the Transparency of Internet Companies . Principles 19  
-26 of this UNESCO developed framework  deal specifically with the question of 
Personal Data Gathering and Use, as well as Data Access.  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• In line with the Policy Area on Data Governance in the Recommendation on AI Ethics, 
governments  should leverage the power of open government data in strengthening 
transparency and innovation through the development of data -driven public services. 
Governments, private sector, and civil society should support digitization and 
preservation of documentary archives, transfor ming them into data that can power 
digital transformation for public good .  
• All stakeholders  should respect the privacy of users, including right to anonymity 
online and provide them with tools for managing and controlling their data, including 
the possibi lity to remove data from online platforms , with a special attention given to 
the protection of data privacy of children.  
• Governments  should set up frameworks for data interoperability and encourage the 
creation of data stewards and data commons, to enhance  control of users over their 
data.    
• Due to the impact large datasets have on AI systems, companies  should adhere to 
internationally recognized standards related to data governance and in particular 
training algorithms.    
• Companies  should apply UNESCO’s 26 high -level principles for transparency of 
internet platform companies .  
  
4. Apply human rights online  
a) Core Principles  
 
• ROAM Principle of Human Rights . Internet Universality emphasizes  the importance 
of harmony between the growth and use of the Internet and human rights. A free 
Internet is one that respects the human rights set out in key international agreements 
and enables peo ple to enjoy and exercise them fully. It includes the full range of inter -
relationships between human rights and the Internet, such as freedoms of expression 
and association, privacy, cultural participation, gender equality, security and rights 
concerned w ith education, employment and welfare.  
• In line with the UNESCO Recommendation on the Ethics of AI , governments should 
ensure that emerging technologies including AI, respect the rule of law, and promote 
human rights and fundamental  freedoms.  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• Governments  should create a positive enabling environment for freedom of 
expression and access  to information online, in line with international guarantees of 
these rights, promoting universal access  to the Internet, a nd taking measures to 
reinforce the safety of journalists and artists online, including with a specific focus on 
women journalists and artists.  
• Governments  should  respect  the requirements of Article 19(3) of the ICCPR.  
• Digital platforms  should respect huma n rights and adhere to international human 
rights standards in accordance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and 
Human Rights, applying them consistently and fairly across all regions, languages, 
and technologies.  
• Digital platforms  should conduct p eriodic risk assessments, including gender 
specific risk assessments, as well as Ethical Impact Assessments to identify and 
address any actual or potential harm or human rights impact of their operations, based 
on the provisions of Article 19 of the ICCPR and drawing on the principles set out in 
the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, and the UNESCO 
Recommendation on the Ethics of AI.  
• Governments  should be transparent and accountable about the requirements they 
place upon digital platforms.  
• Digital platforms  should be transparent and accountable to independent regulatory 
systems in how they handle  the rights to freedom of expression, access to information, 
and freedom of association and the safeguards to address and prevent online gender -
base d violence that are direct threats to the universal human rights and fundamental 
freedoms of women and girls.  
• Education systems, and professional organizations  should equip engineers, data 
scientists, and other members of the technical community, to under stand human rights, 
ethical standards  and gender equality  perspectives how to apply them to the products 
and services they develop or maintain.  
• Lawmakers  should structure processes of legal reform impacting human rights online 
in a multistakeholder partici patory  way, including with the full engagement of women’s 
rights organizations to support reforms that specifically address gender -based 
violence and disinformation online  
• Digital platforms  should enable inclusive  access to culture and participation in 
cultural life and its benefits as an ethical, social and economic imperative;  
• Policymakers and digital platforms  should cooperate to protect and foster the 
diversity of cultural contents and languages online , and reinforce intellectual property 
to uphold the  economic and social rights of artists.  
 
5. Accountability for discrimination and misleading content  
a) Core Principles  
 
• High -Level Principles for the Transparency of Internet Companies . Principles 5 -
9 of this UNESCO developed framework deal specifically with the question of content 
and process transparency when it comes to efforts by platforms to address content 
issues.  
• The principles underpinning the  UNESCO  Guidelines for regulating dig ital 
platforms  will be particularly useful here and should be integrated throughout to 
ensure effective human -rights based approaches.  
• The Windhoek +30 Declaration , adopted  at the 2021 World Press Freedom 
Conference in Namibia and subsequently endorsed by UNESCO Member States at 
the 42nd session of its General Conference, outlines principles to ensure information 
as a common good in the digital age. It particularly calls for greater transparency of 
Internet companies, support for the economic viability of independent journalism, and 
incre ased efforts to teach citizens critical thinking through media and information 
literacy.  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• UNESCO and partners  should support uptake of guidelines on the development and 
implementation of independent regulatory processe s that guarantee freedom of 
expression and access to information while dealing with content that is illegal 
according to international human rights law, and corresponding jurisprudence and 
content that risks significant harm to democracy and the enjoyment of human rights.  
• Regulatory frameworks  targeting digital platforms, including self - co- and 
governmental regulatory frameworks, must be based on international standards of 
freedom of expression, access to information and gender equality.  
• Platform models , editorial policies  and advertising systems, as well as human and 
algorithmic content moderation policies and practices, should be made transparent  
and eliminate gender bias . 
• All relevant stakeholders  should  advocate for human rights -respecting regulation on  
content moderation, and to hold government and digital platforms accountable.  
• Regulatory bodies  should focus  regulation mainly on the systems and processes 
used by platforms, rather than on single pieces of content. Any specific decisions 
about the legali ty of specific pieces of content should follow due process and be open 
to review by a judicial body.  
• Digital platforms  should commit  to being transparent about the systems and 
processes used to moderate and curate content on their platforms and how those 
systems and processes fulfil the goal of regulation and address the specific threats to 
the safety of women and girls. (see also principle 4)  
• Digital platforms  should adhere to international human rights standards in the way 
they operate and to be able to demonstrate  how they are implementing these 
standards and other policies contained in their terms of service, including gender 
disaggregation in their reporting of content moderation statistics, and the guidelines 
set out in the Policy Area on Communication  and Information in the Recommendation 
on the Ethics of AI.  
• Digital platforms  should have  content moderation and curation policies and practices 
consistent with international human rights standards.  
• Digital platforms  should offer Media and Information Literacy resources and training, 
empowering users to interact critically and safely with digital content and technologies 
to raise awareness of the impact of online harassment  (including towards women and 
girls), to produce guidance on navigating online spaces safely and to build a culture 
of solidarity against online disinformation and violence.  
• Digital platforms  should have effective user complaints mechanism to allow users 
and non -users meaningful opportunities  to raise their conc erns, especially women and 
girls who are experiencing harassment and threats online, including the right to 
redress against decisions taken.  
• Relevant stakeholders  commit to taking concretes actions for the prevention, 
protection and prosecution of online violence against journalists, artists, scientists, 
human rights and gender equality activists.  
 
6. Regulation of artificial intelligence  
a) Core Principles  
 
• The Ethics of AI principles  encompassed in the Recommendation on the Ethics 
of Artificial Intelligence , the first global standard -setting instrument that was adopted 
in November 2021, by the 193 Member  States, namely Proportionality and Do No 
Harm, Safety and security, Fairness and non -discrimination, Sustainability, Right to 
Privacy and Data P rotection, Human oversight and determination, Transparency and 
explainability, Responsibility and accountability, Awareness and literacy, Multi -
stakeholder and adaptive governance and collaboration.  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• Governments  should apply AI regulation  in a manner consistent with international 
human rights standards, including the UNESCO Recommendation on AI Ethics, and 
Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and 
under the public scrutiny of civ il society organizations, journalists, artists, scientist, 
researchers, and other relevant institutions in a system of checks and balances.  
• AI regulation  should take into account the complex nature of AI systems, and the fact 
that they span many domains an d policy areas.  
• The principles of transparency and accountability should be core to any AI regulation, 
taking into account the responsibility  of governments  to the risks that AI systems that 
they might be adopting could include, and the responsibility of the companies  
developing AI systems, throughout the supply chain and the different stages in the AI 
life cycle.  
• Accountability measures  should  include redressal measures, establishing AI ethics 
officers, and the possibility to report harm caused by AI sys tems.  
• Governments  should assess and measure the impact of AI and other emerging 
technologies on the environment , and set policy guidelines to balance any risks.  
• The AI regulatory framework  should  include a strong component of data governance.  
• Regulatory processes  should  be led through an open, transparent, multistakeholder, 
and evidence -based manner, including the collection of gender disaggregated 
statistics.  
• Regulatory systems  must have suffici ent and independent funding to carry out their 
responsibilities effectively including  dedicated funds from their public budgets to 
finance gender -responsive schemes and ensure that national digital policies include 
a gender action plan.  
• Regulatory systems  should  include monitoring mechanisms such as Ethical Impact 
Assessment and Readiness Assessment.  
• Regulations dealing with informational issues  with respect to AI and the use of 
algorithms and automated  mechanisms for content moderation and curation should 
also be informed by UNESCO’s Guidelines for regulating digital platforms: a 
multistakeholder approach to safeguarding freedom of expression and access to 
information , especially as it concerns measures  to eliminate gendered disinformation 
and online gender based violence . (These guidelines are currently under development 
and due to be published later in 2023)  
• Governments and relevant stakeholders should take accountability to develop 
value orientation, understanding, and skills needed for ethical use of AI for all citizens 
based on AI and Education: Guidance for Policy -makers, published by UNESCO in 
2021.  
 
7. Digital commons as a global public good  
a) Core Principles  
 
• Our actions  should be guided by commitments to human rights, inclusion, equity, 
environmental sustainability, and social justice  
• Education  should remain a human right and public good in digital as well as in 
physical spaces, as explained in Reimagining Our Futures To gether: A New Social 
Contract for Education, published by  UNESCO in 2019.  
• The Windhoek +30 Declaration , adopted at the 2021 World Press Freedom 
Conference in Namibia and subsequently endorsed by UNESCO Member States at 
the 42nd session of its General Confe rence, outlines  principles to ensure information 
as a common good in the digital age. It particularly calls for greater transparency of 
Internet companies, support for the economic viability of independent journalism, and 
increased efforts to teach citizen s critical thinking through media and information 
literacy.  
• ROAM Principle of Multistakeholder Participation . Multistakeholder participation in 
the development and governance of the Internet has drawn together governments, 
intergovernmental and internation al organisations, the private sector, civil society and 
the Internet technical and professional community and academia. The goal of 
multistakeholder participation is to improve the inclusiveness and quality of decision -
making by including all those who hav e an interest in the Internet and its impact on 
wider social, economic and cultural development in open and transparent decision -
making processes.  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• The scientific community  should make multilingual scientific knowledge openly 
available , accessible and reusable for everyone; increase scientific collaborations; 
and sharing of information and knowledge  for the benefits of science and society.  
• Promote and engage in international and multi -stakeholder cooperation  in the 
context of open science and access for information to all, with a view to reducing digital, 
technological knowledge gaps  and gender digital gaps, in line with UNESCO’s 
Recommendation on Open Science  
• Establish and iteratively improve public digital le arning platforms  with high 
quality, curriculum -aligned education resources, ensuring they are free, open and 
accessible for all, in the framework of the initiative of Gateway to Public Digital 
Learning launched at the Transforming Education Summit and in line with UNESCO’s 
Recommendation  on Open Educational Resources, while also protecting the privacy, 
safety and data security of users.  
• Aim for achieving universal digital literacy for education  being mindful of the 
systemic and long -term transformation of the labour market due to digitalization. The 
a system -wide approach to integrate values, knowledge, understanding, and skills on 
digital technologies into the school curricula, qualifications of  technical and vocational 
education and training (TVET) and higher education, taking into consideration the 
ethical aspects and interrelated humanistic disciplines. Be cognizant of the emergence 
of a set of AI literacy skills required for effective human –machine collaboration. Take 
institutional actions to enhance digital literacy across all layers of society. Give a 
special focus on women and girls, cultural and linguistic minority groups, and older 
people . 
• Governments and the cultural community  should imp lement the principles of the 
MONDIACULT 2022 Declaration on culture as a global public good, with a view to 
harness and contribute to the design  and implementation of suitable digital 
technologies across the cultural value chain to promote a diverse supply  of and plural 
access to cultural expressions online, bearing in mind the importance of preserving 
cultural heritage, diversity , artistic freedom  and gender equality . 
• Governments  should implement the principles of the Windhoek+30 Declaration on 
Information as a Public Good, built on the three pillars of media viability, transparency 
of internet platform companies, media and information literacy and gender equality.  
 
8. Other areas : Build capacities for fair and equitable participation in digital 
transformation  
a) Core Principles  
 
• Inclusive, equitable and quality education and lifelong learning for all : Steer 
human -centred digital learning to advance our national and international aspirations 
for education and lifelong learning.  
• ROAM Principle of ‘Accessibility to All’ . The principle of Accessibility to All has 
technical, economic and social aspects. It reaches far beyond mere connectivity, for 
example, to include issu es of affordability, content and capability. It is closely related 
within societies to the distribution of income and resources between women and men, 
poor and rich, rural and urban communities, language groups and ethnic minorities, 
and those affected by disability or marginalisation.  
 
b) Key Commitment/ Pledges/ Actions  
 
• Use three keys to unlock the power of digital teaching and learning , making it 
more universally accessible and a more reliable pillar of holistic educational 
experiences:  
• Content . High quality, curriculum -relevant digital teaching and learning content must 
be made available to all students learners, teachers and caregive rs through digital 
learning platforms  
• Capacity . Capacity to use digital technology to improve learning must be 
strengthened to ensure teachers, learners and other education stakeholders have the 
skills and knowledge needed to leverage digital tools for lea rning using evidence -
based approaches.  
• Connectivity . Digital connectivity helps ensure that all schools and individuals can 
benefit from the educational  advantages that come with good quality internet 
connections.  
• States, civil society, private sector, and international organisations , commit to 
making the necessary investments and taking the required actions to identify and 
cooperate to close gender gaps related to the capacities of all groups to enjoy fair 
equal and safe participation  in all aspects of digital knowledge societies – from 
technology development and deployment, to the generation and exchange of 
information and knowledge  
• Relevant stakeholder s build capacities to leverage digital technologies for cultural 
employment, as to enhance the safeguarding, promotion, digitization , and 
inventorying of cultural heritage . 
Contact : Bobir Tukhtabayev , Chief of the Section for Relations with the United Nati ons 
and Intergovernmental Organizations  (b.tukhtabayev@unesco.org ) 