  
 
 
 
 
The M.I. Krivosheev Radio Research & 
Development Institute  
 
16 Kazakova str.,  
Moscow, Russia, 105064  
Tel: (495) 647 17 77 , Fax: (499) 261 00 90  
  E-mail: info@niir.ru , http://www.niir.ru  
 
  
 
 
Global Digital Compact  
 
 
online  submission by  
Radio Research and Development Institute (NIIR)  
 
April , 2023  
 
  

2 
 
 
A clear and unambiguous definition of Internet terminology is critical for the 
Global Digital Compact (GCD). The lack of mandatory standards in the Internet 
environment, the involvement of many stakeholders with different profiles and 
levels of expertise has led to the fact that the terms o f the Internet ecosystem are 
understood as a whole, but in many cases by individual parties in their own way. 
This leads to misunderstanding, double standards and ambiguity of interpretations.  
The form ing of Internet terms  and definitions  is subject to numerous conditions. 
These are various linguistic factors of different languages, academic traditions, 
sociological and cultural processes taking place in technical and user groups, etc.  
Despite the  common understanding of terms such as:  
• critical infrastructure;  
• internet service platform;  
• digital monopoly, the dominant Internet service provider;  
• fragmentation;  
• etc, 
for them there are no precise, unambiguous, legally verified definitions accepted at 
the international level.  
The terminology of the Internet as an innovative constantly changing environment 
in which the technical, service, user parts coexist integrally is quite complex by its 
nature. However, right now there is a real opportunity to define the basic 
(fundamental) units of the “Inte rnet language” in the GDC and avoid 
terminological confusion. This opportunity cannot be missed!  
During the ongoing informal consultations led by the Co -facilitators Rwanda and 
Sweden, participants actively use Internet terminology. And it is already clear  from 
the context of the speeches that there is a difference in the understanding and use 
of terms by different participants.  
Professional Internet terminology is especially important in high -level documents. 
It facilitates communication among many stakeho lders, making it easier for them 
to understand each other and adjust the terms to the features of their native 
language. This kind of terminology not only unites the professional community in 
(and the features of their communication), but also allows newco mers to join it.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Based on the experience of NIIR in international organizations and international 
platforms, it can be noted that terminological accuracy and conceptual unambiguity 
are the basis for the subsequent positive perception and practical impl ementation of 
any international documents. In the case of low -quality terminology in high -level 
documents, problems immediately arise in the application of a particular norm or 
policy. This, in turn, leads to significant consequences: possible violation of  the 
rights of subjects, incorrect decision -making, which reduces the practical value of 
high-level documents. All this is a consequence of the individual interpretation of a 
specific term contained in a legal norm, if the authors, giving a legal definitio n, 
used an ambiguous specific term that allows for different understandings.  
The development of the terminology that will be included in the GDC is necessary 
for the formation of legal practice and traditions in individual jurisdictions and the 
public cons ciousness of the Internet community. Thus, it becomes obvious that the 
Internet ecosystem needs to form a holistic, unified conceptual global space based 
on the formation of a unified terminology. During the preparation of the GDC, a 
practical document, a terminological glossary, can be prepared, which will become 
part of the GDC, and subsequently published on the official web page of the Office 
of the Secretary -General's Envoy on Technology for global use by all interested 
parties.  
In turn, one way or anot her, all these factors will ultimately determine the quality 
and effectiveness of the subsequent implementation of the GCD, and according to 
the "top -down" model, the quality of the adopted national regulatory documents 
and policies within the framework of  the implementation of the voluntary 
principles of the GCD, which use a wide variety of technical/legal/general terms. It 
is obvious that the higher the level of preparation of the terminology base, the 
higher the overall level of legal impact of the GCD o n the effective regulation of 
the most diverse aspects of the Internet ecosystem.  
  
4 
 
 
About Radio Research and Development Institute  
Radio Research and Development Institute (NIIR)  named after prof. M.I. 
Krivosheev specializes in research and development in  the field of information and 
communication technologies (ICTs), navigation, satellite and terrestrial 
communication and television broadcasting systems, as well as provides scientific 
and methodological support to national and international ICT regulation . 
NIIR designs and/or manufactures:  
 satellite -borne transponders;  
 communication and broadcasting systems and facilities;  
 various purpose radio systems and facilities.  
23 Doctors of Science and 76 PhDs are employed by NIIR. The work of NIIR’s 
staff is recog nized internationally.  Radio Research and Development Institute 
actively participate in the work of the International Telecommunication Union. 
NIIR employees are serving as Chairman and Vice Ch airmans at 8 ITU  Study 
Group s`. Institute  makes a valuable contribution to the work Regional 
Commonwealth in the field of communications  (RCC) . NIIR employees represent 
the Russian Federation in the ICANN Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC), 
participate in the work of RIPE NCC and contribute to  the work of the UN IGF 
and the regional IGF.  
 