 
 
 
Digital Futures Commission submission to the Global Digital Compact, April 2023  
Noting that t he Global Digital Compact (GDC) will  “outline shared principles for an open, free and 
secure digital future for all ”, we write to urge that ‘all’ includes children. In so doing, we point to 
both  the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the  Committee on the Rights of the 
Child’s 2021 General Com ment on Children’s Rights in Relation to the Digital Environment . Children 
under the age of 18 are one in three people on the planet and, significantly, one in three of the 
world’s internet users . Yet they are often overlooked in internet governance processes, and their 
reliance on the internet as the infrastructure of the ir lives is often overlooked in child rights circles.  
Noting, further, that the GDC is likely to include issues of “ digital connectivity, avoiding Internet 
fragmentation, providing people with options as to how their data is used, application of human 
rights online, and promoting a trustworthy Internet by introducing accountability criteria for 
discrimination and misleading content ”, we again urge specific consideration of children. When 
people are provided with options regarding their data, such provision  must be child -friendly. When 
human rights are applied online, this must include children’s rights. When promoting a trustworthy 
internet, children must be consulted in the process and when evaluating the adequacy of the 
outcome. These and many more requir ements are set out in General Comment 25, and all are 
relevant and important for the GDC.  
The Digital Futures Commission  (DFC) is an exciting research collaboration of unique organisations 
that invites innovators, policymakers, regulators, academics and civil society to unlock digital 
innovation in the interests of children and young peopl e. It seeks to put the needs of children and 
young people into the minds and work plans of digital innovators, businesses, regulators and 
governments. It calls for a critical examination of how innovation is reconfiguring children’s lives to 
reimagine the digital world in value -sensitive ways that uphold their rights and take practical steps 
to meet their needs.   
The work of the DFC has just concluded with a report and toolkit to advance Child Rights by Design  
in the development and governance of digital services, systems and products. We took our lead from 
the UN Committee on the Rights of  the Child’s authoritative statement, General  Comment No. 25 , 
on how to implement the UNCRC in relation to the digital environment. We consulted innovators, 
practitioners, experts and children to make develop the guidance and make it practical. To find 
answers for them, we drew on the collected wisdom of many rights -based, ethical and value -
sensitive organisations and a consultation with children around the country . The resulting toolkit  
sets out principle -based design considerations to help digital innov ators embed children’s rights into 
digital products and services.  
 
In sum, our submission to the Global Digital Compact urges that:  
 
• Children’s rights are explicitly recognised and included  through an explicit reference to the 
UNCRC and General Comment 25.  
• Children of all ages are consulted and heard, as is their right under article 12.  
• Child Rights by Design is advocated (along with Privacy by Design, Safety by Design, etc.) in 
the Summit o f the Future.  
 
Professor Sonia Livingstone and Dr Kruakae Pothong, Digital Futures Commission  (5Rights 
Foundation ) and London School of Economics and Political Science . 

Note:  
 
We consulted 143 children abou t their rights in the digital environment 
https://digitalfuturescommission.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2023/03/July -consultation -
methodol ogy-Final.pdf   
 
We reviewed available consultations with children to identify their concerns regarding the 
digital environment here https://digitalfuturescommission.org.uk/wp -
content/uploads/2020/10/Children -and-Young -Peoples -Voices.pdf   
 
We consulted over 100 experts and professionals, UK and international, about how t he 
digital environment could and should be respect, protect and promote children's rights in its 
policy, design and practice. https://digitalfuturescommi ssion.org.uk/wp -
content/uploads/2023/03/DFC_report -online.pdf   
 
We built on the framework of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child's General 
Comment 25 and its global consultation with 700 children in 26 countries 
https://5rightsfoundation.com/our -work/childrens -rights/uncrc -general -comment.html   
 
 