 
 
 
 
WORLD SUMMIT ON THE INFORMATION SOCIETY (WSIS) FORUM  
Contribution for the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
 
Introduction  
The UN General Assembly Resolution 56/183  (21 December 2001) endorsed the holding of 
the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS)  in two phases. The first phase took 
place in Geneva from 10 to 12 December 2003 and the second phase took place in Tunis, from 
16 to 18 November 2005. The goal of WSIS is to achieve a common vision, desire and 
commitment to build a people -centred, inclusi ve and development -oriented information 
society where everyone can create, access, utilize and share information.  
Through the Summit’s first phase in 2003, a framework for an inclusive information society 
was created as set out in the Geneva Plan of Actio n1. Since 2015, the WSIS Process and the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are being aligned by stakeholders to integrate 
information and communication technologies ( ICTs) into their approaches in implementing 
the activities/initiatives to support t he goals of the 2030 Agenda.  
In line with UN Resolution А/70/1  and Resolution А/70/125 , ITU, UNESCO, UNDP and 
UNCTAD, in collaboration with more than 30 UN agencies, are continuously working towards 
strengthening the alignment of the WSIS Process implementation activities with the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development, thereby highlighting the direct linkages between WSIS 
Action Lines and SDGs.  
 
WSIS Forum: World's Largest Annual Gathering of the 'ICT for Development ' Community  
The WSIS Forum is an example of successful digital cooperation within UN Agencies  including 
the Governments, Private Sector, Civil Society, Academia and the Technical Community.  The 
Forum  is co -organized by ITU, UNESCO, UNDP and UNCTAD, in clos e collaboration with other 
UN Agencies ( FAO, ILO, ITC, UNDESA,  UNEP, UNHCR, UNICEF, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNODC, UPU, 
UN Women, UN Tech Bank for LDCs, UNU, WFP, WHO, WIPO,  WMO and UN Regional 
Commissions ) and all WSIS Action Line Facilitators/co -facilitators . 
 
1 The Plan of Action sets forth a clear commitment to translate these principles into practice and to meet 
concrete and tangible targets with the aim of promoting sustainable development. 
https://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs/promotional/brochure -dop-poa.pdf  

The WSIS Forum has proven to be an efficient medium for coordination of multistakeholder 
implementation activities , information exchange, creation of knowledge, sharing of best 
practices and foster partnerships to advance development goals.  
The WSIS Forum 2023  took place from 13 to 17 March 2023 in Geneva, Switzerland, and 
continued with virtual sessions in April -May. The overall theme of the WSIS Forum 2023 is 
WSIS Action Lines for building back better and accelerating the achievement of the SDGs 
(www.wsis.org/forum) .  
The WSIS Forum continues to serve as an open and inclusive platform to ensure the common 
WSIS goals are met.  
 
WSIS Action Lines: An Information Society for All  – Key Principles   
The WSIS Action Lines  serve as key principles for building an inclusive information and 
knowledge societies. All stakeholders should work together to: improve access to information 
and communication infrastructure and technologies as well as to information and knowledge; 
build  capacity; increase confidence and security in the use of ICTs; create an enabling 
environment at all levels; develop and widen ICT applications; foster and respect cultural 
diversity; recognize the role of the media; address the ethical dimensions of the Information 
Society; and encourage international and regional cooperation.  
The vital role of ICTs as a catalyst for development is specifically recognized in the new 
development framework Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development,  which acknowledges that “the spread of information and communication 
technology and global interconnectedness has great potential to accelerate human progress 
and to develop knowledge societies, to bridge the digital divide and to develop knowledge 
societ ies, as does scientific and technological innovation across areas as diverse as medicine 
and energy.  
Four targets of the SDGs explicitly recognize the role of ICTs. This applies to the targets on 
Education and scholarships (4.b) on Gender empowerment (5.b ) on Infrastructure for 
Universal and Affordable access to ICTs and the Internet in the Least Developed Countries 
(9.c) and more broadly, Goal 17 on Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalizing 
the global partnership for sustainable development,  which calls to enhance the use of 
enabling technology, in particular ICTs. There are also several references to technology in 
general throughout the SDGs in which ICTs play an important direct or indirect role.  At the 
same time, it should  be noted that th e WSIS outcome documents were drafted at a time when 
man y aspects of today’s high level of digitalization were not known or foreseen.  
The WSIS -SDG Matrix developed by WSIS Action Line Facilitators serves as the mechanism to 
map, analyze and coordinate the implementation of WSIS Action Lines, and more specifically, 
ICTs as enablers and accelerators of the SDGs. The Matrix draws direct linkages of the WSIS 
Action Lines with the SDGs to continue strengthening the impact of ICTs for sustainable 
development ( https://www.itu.int/net4/wsis/sdg/ ). 
The WSIS Stocktaking : A Global Repository of ICT -Driven Sustainable Development Projects 
and Best Practices  
The WSIS Stocktaking process  was initiated in October 2004 during the Tunis phase of WSIS, 
and in the years since has come to comprise the database of:  
• exchanges of information on p rojects  
• sharing of best practices of certain regions  
• initiatives related to the implementation of the 11 WSIS Action Lines 
• linkage between the 11 action lines and the SDGs – a linkage that becomes 
more and more important over the years.  
The WSIS Stocktakin g Process serves as a tool to monitor the implementation of the WSIS 
Action Lines and demonstrate the capacity of ICTs to foster development. As a unique global 
platform, the WSIS Stocktaking portal hosts an international register of ICT projects and 
activ ities conducted by a diverse range of stakeholders, including governments, international 
organizations, the business sector, civil society, and other entities. This portal represents a 
repository of pr ojects that stakeholders can access to stay informed ab out the latest progress 
in the implementation of WSIS outcomes.  
The principal role of the WSIS Stocktaking exercise is to collect information, share knowledge 
and experiences and leverage the activities of stakeholders working on the implementation 
of WSIS  outcomes. The WSIS stocktaking database contains over 14,000 entries of ICTs 
projects to date. B y facilitating the exchange of information, the WSIS Stocktaking can 
empower  stakeholders to collaborate, learn from each other, and identify opportunities to 
enhance the impact of ICTs in promoting sustainable development . 
 
The WSIS Prizes : A Global Contest Recognizing the Power of ICTs in Enabling Sustainable 
Development  
The WSIS Prizes  contest is an integral part of the WSIS Stocktaking process set up in 2004 to 
assist WSIS implementation and follow -up. The contest was held for the first time in 2012  and 
has rapidly gained popularity and attention with in the global community.  
This annual contest recognizes outstanding initiatives and projects that leverage the power 
of ICTs to accelerate progress towards the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals. By showcasing innovative and e ffective approaches, the WSIS Prizes 
contest provides a unique opportunity to raise awareness, share good  practices, and inspire 
stakeholders to collaborate on the deployment of ICTs as a driver of sustainable development.  
The prizes are awarded across 18 categories, each directly linked to the 11 WSIS Action Lines 
defined in the Geneva Plan of Action.  The 18 winner projects are selected as the most 
successful stories worldwide, under each category, to serve as best  practice models to be 
replicated by other  stakeholders interested in ICTs for development.  
 
Towards a Sustainable and Inclusive Digital Future: The WSIS and Global Digital Compact  
The WSIS Forum 2023  hybrid week,  held from 13 to 17 March 2023 in Geneva, Switzerland, 
brought together a diverse range of stakeholders to discuss the latest developments in the 
world of ICTs , and associated opportunities and challenges . One of the key topics of discussion 
was the Global Digital Compact, which aims to build a digital future that is open, free, secure, 
and inclusive .  
 
The Ministerial Roundtable at the WSIS Forum 2023 recognized the complementary nature 
of the Global Digital Compact and the WSIS Framework, emphasizing the need for continuous 
dialogue among stakeholders to leverage the learnings of WSIS implementation in discussions 
of the UN SG's report 'Our Common Agenda'. The Ministers emphasized that harnessing the 
power of  digital will be vital to rescuing the SDGs.  
 
In accordance with its mandate, the WSIS+20 review will assess progress and achievements 
made in the first 20 years  of the WSIS . The WSIS Forum 2024 will be branded as WSIS+20 
Forum High -level Event  in Geneva a nd serve as a platform for the WSIS+20 review to provide 
multistakeholder discussions and to take stock of the achievements and key trends, 
challenges , and opportunities since the Geneva Plan of Action . This will complement the work 
of UN Commission on Science and Technology for Development in its system -wide 
assessment of WSIS+20.  
 
To avoid duplication of existing multistakeholder processes, it is important to foster synergies  
between the WSIS+20  proces s, the Global Digital Compact and the Summit of the Future.  
 
The WSIS Action Lines have served a valuable role in identifying and addressing emerging 
trends, opportunities and challenges in the digital world.  All stakeholders, including 
governments, the private sector, civil society, and international organizations, have a role to 
play in implementing the WSIS Action Lines and ensuring that the benefits of ICTs are 
accessible to all.  
 
The WSIS community has se en significant growth in recent years and continues to contribute 
to the WSIS Forum, bringing in valuable insights, ideas, and initiatives that advance the WSIS 
Action Lines and the Sustainable Development Goals.  The annual WSIS Forum has resulted in 
sever al valuable outcomes, which include policy recommendations, achievements, 
publications, and other measures that reflect the strong commitment towards the WSIS 
process and its goals.  
 
 
WSIS Forum 2023 : Key Outcomes  (an input to the GDC) , 13-17 March 2023 , Geneva,  
Switzerland  
The annual WSIS Forum is a global multistakeholder platform facilitating the implementation 
of the WSIS Action Lines for advancing sustainable development, organized by the ITU, 
UNESCO, UNDP, an d UNCTAD, in close collaboration with all WSIS Action Line co -facilitators 
and more than 30 UN agencies. The Forum provides an opportunity for information exchange, 
knowledge creation and sharing of best practices, while identifying emerging trends and 
fostering partnerships, taking into account the evolving information and knowledge societies.  
 
The WSIS Forum 2023 hybrid week was held from 13 to 17 March  in Geneva, Switzerland, and 
brought together experts, policymakers, and diverse stakeholders from arou nd the world to 
discuss ICTs for sustainable development. This year’s Forum theme is WSIS Action Lines for 
building back better and accelerating the achievement of the SDGs . The Forum hybrid week 
welcomed over 2,700 participants  attending both on -site and remotely, from 150 countries 
worldwide. The Forum gathered more than 150 high -level representatives  of the wider WSIS 
stakeholder community, including Ministers and Deputies, Ambassadors; and leaders from 
the private sector, academia and civil society.  
 
This year’s Forum hybrid week had several innovative session formats and featured around 
250 sessions , including open space talks, thematic workshops, country workshops, WSIS 
Action Lines Facilitation Meetings, knowledge cafes, WSIS Prizes, high -level track  sessions, 
and many more. The stakeholders appreciated the new innovative formats, which fostered 
more participatory and collaborative exchanges with engaging dialogues. The WSIS Forum 
2023 continues with virtual workshops from April to May 2023 . Please re fer to the WSIS 
Forum 2023 agenda available here: https://www.itu.int/net4/wsis/forum/2023/Agenda .  
 
The WSIS Forum 2023 saw a significant milestone, as the first female Chairperson, H.E. Dr. 
Emilija Stojmenova Duh, Minister of Digital Transformation, Republic of Slovenia,  chairing 
the WSIS Forum 2023. Summarizing th e high -level track, the Chairperson highlighted that 
‘’international cooperation and multistakeholder engagement are the key, therefore, 
processes as WSIS are an immense contribution. They bring us together to meet and build 
meaningful partnership . And the y are of immense help on our way towards achieving 
sustainable development goals’’.  
 
The concrete outcomes of WSIS Forum 2023 will enable stakeholders to strengthen 
implementation of WSIS Action Lines and the alignment of the WSIS and SDG processes. Some 
of the highlights and key outcomes of the WSIS Forum 2023 are the following:  
 
Highlights:  
• The WSIS Forum 2023 featured high -level keynote speeches from global leaders , 
including the UN Secretary -General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, who emphasized the  
importance of the Forum to build a free and fair information society for all people, 
everywhere; his video message is available here .  
 
• 30+ exhibit ions spaces  showcased ICTs for sustainable development. The exhibitors 
displayed a wide range of technologies and innovative solutions addressing global 
development issues. The WSIS Forum 2023 partners also exhibited their projects and 
initiatives.  The exh ibition spaces also featured virtual reality tools that provided 
participants with different immersive experiences, such as to explore the reality of the 
indigenous people of the Amazon, to explore the enigmatic world of M.K.Čiurlionis 
paintings from Lithu ania, and to explore the XR Olympics. The exhibitors came from 
governments, civil society, private sectors, technical community, academia, youth, 
and the international organisations. The WSIS Forum 2023 photo contests winners 
and finalists photos enriched the exhibition space and the venue.  
 
• The United Nations Group on the Information Society (UNGIS)  reiterated its 
commitment to the WSIS process and WSIS Action Lines implementation as well as to 
strengthen the alignment of the WSIS and SDG processes. UNGIS members discussed 
the preparation of an action plan to levera ge the profile of UNGIS and to contribute 
to other global processes on digital for development issues. Contributions in a video 
format by the UN Heads of UN Agencies are available on WSIS Process Yo uTube 
channel . 
 
• The announcement of the WSIS Prizes 2023 , as an integral part of the WSIS 
Stocktaking , took place during the Forum with 18 winners and 72 champions  
celebrated globally for their efforts in implementing WSIS Action Lines and advancing 
the SDGs. In addition, the winning entries of the WSIS Forum Photo Contest 2023  were 
unveiled, depicting how ICTs are playing a vital, enabling role on the road to achieve 
the SDGs.  
 
• Announcement and awards of the WSIS Special Prizes and Activities have also 
contributed to the overall celebration of ICTs and its economic, social, cultural, and 
environmental impact around the world : 
o 4 WSIS Forum 2023 Hackathon winners : Digital GovHack: Advancing the Digital 
Economy by Leveraging Emerging Technologies. The WSIS Forum 2023 was 
jointly organised by ITU, WSIS, and Digital Government Authority of Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia.  
o 1 winner of the WSIS Healthy Ageing Innovation Prize  
o 1 winner, 5 finalists of the WSIS Digital Servi ce Design Prize 2023  
o Launch of the WSIS x Generation Connect Youth Prize  
 
• Networking tool: 600 participants  used networking tool imeetyou@wsis  for 
networking with onsite participants - LinkedIn . 
 
• The Ministerial Roundtable  at the WSIS Forum 2023 (13 -17 March), benefited from 
the presence and contributions of 40 Ministers/Deputies. In an innovative format with 
3 breakout rooms chaired by Ministers (Gambia, Philippines, UAE), 3 topics were 
discussed:  
o ICTs rescuing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Developme nt WSIS Action 
Lines for building back better and accelerating the achievement of the SDGs  
o World Summit Information Society Ministerial Contribution to the Global 
Digital Compact Consultations  
o Exploring the Potential of Space for all as a Driver of Sustain able 
Development  
 
The Ministerial roundtable of WSIS Forum 2023 concluded with the following:  
o They emphasized that harnessing the power of digital will be vital to rescuing 
the SDGs. ICTs are a powerful tool that should be fully leveraged towards this 
goal. The WSIS process provides an existing and well -functioning framework 
for accelerating the achievement of the SDGs.  
o They invited all stakeholders to harness the power of digital and leverage the 
alignment between the WSIS process and the 2030 agenda f or sustainable 
development, as well as the SDG Digital Day to accelerate the achievement the 
SDGs.  
o They recognized that discussions on Our Common Agenda and especially its 
Global Digital Compact are complementary to the WSIS Framework. Therefore, 
they invi ted all stakeholders to leverage the learnings of the implementation 
of the WSIS Framework and related process in their deliberations of Our 
Common Agenda.  
o They recognized the enormous potential that Space holds in global efforts to 
connect the unconnected  and beyond. Thus, they invited all stakeholders to 
work together to ensure that Space is leveraged in a safe and sustainable 
manner.  
 
• The WSIS Forum 2023 Ambassadors roundtable  discussion took place on 13 March 
2023, featuring approximately 50 Ambassadors  to UN in Geneva, where they 
deliberated on the following topics:  
o Leveraging the power of ICTs and the need to bring about an inclusive, 
prosperous, sustainable, safe and trusted digital future for all;  
o Meaningful communication and Geneva community’s role in effective 
implementation of UN Processes;  
o WSIS+20 review process and the future of WSIS beyond 2025 – identifying 
emerging trends, challenges and opportunities for implementing the WSIS 
Action Lines;  
o WSIS +20 review and the GDC  
o GDC discussions could cons ider ongoing multistakeholder 
discussions on WSIS+20. The WSIS Action Lines are particularly 
important as they capture emerging trends, opportunities, and 
challenges in the digital world beyond 2025.  WSIS Forum will 
continue to play an important role in di gitalization;  
o Global Digital Compact process must reflect the needs of 
developing countries to create more equitable prosperity and 
reduce structural inequalities. Questions on the GDC process, 
including its linkages with the Summit of the Future, were rai sed. 
Mexico informed that during the GDC discussions in Mexico, the 
imperative of closing the digital divides was discussed to produce 
tangible elements to be included in the future Global Digital 
Compact to be adopted at the Summit of the Future in 2024;  
o To avoid duplication, the WSIS+20, Global Digital Compact, and 
Summit of the Future should be synergized. Some highlighted 
strengthening the role and contribution of the Geneva community 
towards can contribute to Global Digital Compact discussions with 
Sweden, Rwanda, and the UN Tech Envoy. WSIS+20 is important 
to achieve the common goal of connecting humanity.  
 
• The WSIS Forum 2023 provided a platform for multistakeholder consultations  on the 
WSIS+20 review . The discussions reflected on the achievements of  the WSIS process 
in the past 20 years, its future direction, and its interconnection with other global 
processes, including the Global Digital Compact. Despite the progress made in the past 
20 years of the WSIS process, there are still many complex challe nges to overcome. It 
is paramount to maintain the momentum towards a digital future that is inclusive and 
sustainable, with technology serving the needs of everyone, leaving no one behind. 
All stakeholders are invited to contribute to the WSIS+20 Forum Hig h-level Event in 
Geneva, from 27 to 31 May 2024, and its upcoming open consultation process, which 
aims to ensure wide participation in and broad ownership of the Forum.  The Forum 
continues to  collect  input s from stakeholders on emerging trends, challenges  and 
opportunities on WSIS Action Lines for 20 years of their implementation and beyond.  
 
• The WSIS Forum 2023 also provided a platform for multistakeholder discussions  on 
the Global Digital Compact. The co -facilitators of the GDC, H.E. Mr. Claver Gatete, 
Ambassador of Rwanda, and H.E. Ms. Anna Karin Eneström, Ambassador of Sweden, 
were present at the WSIS Forum and had the opportunity to interact and listen to the 
views of multistakeholders on the fut ure on GDC and the importance of the WSIS 
process beyond 2025. Mr. Amandeep Singh Gill, UN Secretary -General's Envoy on 
Technology, was also present at the Forum.  
 
• For its second edition, the Mayors track  at the WSIS Forum 2023, co -organized by ITU 
and Geneva Cities Hub, provided an opportunity to discuss how smart cities are the 
drivers of innovative sustainable development and enablers to respond  to challenges 
related to climate change and achievement of the SDGs. Mayors presented concrete 
projects and local achievements on scalable and replicable good practices of digital 
solutions for climate change adaptation and energy transition. They also in teracted 
during a multistakeholder High -Level Dialogue  engaging with High -Level 
representatives from the private sector, UN organizations and the c ivil society on ways 
to accelerate digital transformation and building more resilient cities.  
 
• Along with the Forum and High -Level Track sessions, the WSIS Forum 2023 also 
featured a variety of social events  that provide on -site participants with opportunities 
to network and engage in an informal setting.  
 
• Permanent Mission of India organised Yoga: wellbeing and mindfulness sessions  with 
profession al instructors during the WSIS Forum 2023, which provided on -site 
participants with breathing exercises to relax and unwind from the busy Forum 
schedule as well as to improve the mindfulness.  
 
• The daily video highlights and interviews are available here . For the WSIS Forum 2023 
pictures and photos, please see here . 
 
Outcomes:  
• The full list of official WSIS Forum 2023 outcomes and the below publications will be 
made available on the WSIS Forum 2023 website:  
o WSIS Forum 2023: Outcome Document  
o WSIS Forum 2023: High -Leve l Track Outcomes and Executive Brief  
o WSIS Stocktaking Report 2023  
o WSIS Stocktaking Success Stories 2023  
o WSIS Forum 2023 and SDG Matrix  
o WSIS Forum 2023 Report WSIS Action Lines: Accelerating the recovery from 
the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) and the full implementation of the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development at all levels.  
 
• The Forum also provided opportunities for stakeholders to fostering new partnerships 
and collaborations among different stakeholders, promoting knowledge -sharing and 
collective action towards digital cooperation.  
 
• #WSIS  was the 6th trending hashtag on Twitter in Switzerland during the High -Level 
segment.  
 
• The WSIS Forum 2023 highlighted innovative ICT solutions and best practices from 
around the world, showcasing the potential  of digital technologies to drive sustainable 
development and social progress.  
 
Impact:  
• The WSIS Forum 2023 contributed to advancing the global digital agenda and 
promoting the use of ICTs for sustainable development, through the multistakeholder 
approach , fostering dialogue and meaningful discussions around key ICT -related 
issues and trends.  
 
• The WSIS Forum 2023 provided an open, crowdsourced, and inclusive platform for 
building networks and partnerships, facilitating the exchange of ideas, best practice s 
and experiences, and promoting collective action towards achieving global goals.  
 
• The Forum demonstrated a strong commitment and active participation from 
stakeholders across all sectors, including governments, private sector, technical 
communities, civi l society, and academia to the shared vision of the WSIS. The 
engagement and contributions of these stakeholders were critical in shaping the 
discussions and outcomes of the Forum and in driving progress towards achieving the 
WSIS and SDG goals.  
 
• The Forum  proved the WSIS process and the WSIS Action Lines to be a good example 
of a well -functioning framework for accelerating the achievement of the SDGs and this 
global platform continues to evolve reflecting the scope, pace, complexity, and impact 
of today’s digital transformation.  
 
• UN WSIS Action Line Facilitators, ILO, ITC, ITU, UNCTAD, UNDP, UNDESA, UNESCO, 
UNEP, UPU, WHO, WMO, and UPU assessed the contribution of the Action Lines since 
2003 and discussed the challenges and opportunities.  
 
All stakeholders are invited to participate and contribute actively to the WSIS Forum 2024 , 
which will be branded as WSIS+20 Forum High -Level Event, scheduled to take place from 27 
to 31 May 2024  in Geneva, Switzerland.  
 
 