 
 
Submission to the Global Digital Compact  
April 2023  
 
About AARP  
 
AARP is a nonpartisan, nonprofit association based in the US dedicated to enhancing the 
quality of life for all as we age. Since its founding in 1958, AARP has delivered value to 
its members through advocacy, information, and service. As a social change or ganization, 
we work tirelessly to fulfill our vision of a society in which everyone ages with dignity 
and purpose. While being a domestic organization, AARP has always had an international 
perspective and we pride ourselves on being a leader on health and economic security 
issues and a respected global source of information and advocacy.  
For additional information or questions, please contact:  
 Michael Phillips  | Director, Technology Strategy & Relationships  
mphillips @aarp.org  | 601 E Street NW, Washington  DC, 20049  | 202 -434-3109  
 
Summary  
 
Increasing digital connection for older adults is critical to achieving universal internet 
connectivity and represents one of the shared global challenges of the twenty -first 
century.   
A 2022 global survey  found 27 percent of people over 55 never use the internet, and 
another 31 percent only use it occasionally. Th e gap in internet access mean s that the 
current state of digital connectivity  can reinforce inequalities rather than break them 
down and  create barriers to the ingredients of modern healthy aging such as healthcare, 
financial services, and social connection.   
Beyond the multitude of b enefits  to individuals that connectivity can provide, there is 
also a strong economic case for getting older adults online. Older Adults are the 
wealthiest age cohort  in the world . By 2050 , the annual economic contributions of the 
50-plus age group in the US will triple, from $8.3 trillion to $26.8 trillion. Despite older 
adults’ potential to contribute to society economically and socially as innovators, 
mentors, caregivers, and leaders, they lack  equitable and reliable internet access in both 
developed and developing economies. In developing countries, internet penetration is 
often far lower. Such digital connectivity gaps are not only to the detriment of older 
adults but are also a missed opportunity for their communities and countries.  
 
 
AARP’s  submission to the Global Digital Compact examines th ree key barriers to digital 
adoption by older adults and aggregates recommendations  that were surfaced through 
the Network for the ‘Digital Inclusion of Older Adults ’. 
 
The Network for the Digital Inclusi on of Older Persons  
 
In an effort to address these issues and help close the gaps, in 2022 AARP convened a 
series of roundtables with experts from governments, the private sector, and 
nongovernmental organizations, focusing on three key pillars for achievi ng the digital 
inclusion of aging populations:  
1. Broadband Access : Today, broadband is seen as the foundation for an internet -
dependent world. However, uptake is undermined by barriers to physical access 
as well as issues of affordability that impact older adults  disproportionately.  
2. Digital Skills : Even when connecte d to the internet, many older adults face a 
significant but surmountable skills gap that limits the utility of digital devices and 
services. Adequate and appropriate training can help ensure that older adults get 
online and get the most out of the digital realm.  
3. Inclusive Design : Design processes often tend to treat older adults and their 
needs as afterthoughts. Involving older adults of all backgrounds and abilities 
from the start, and adapting to their design needs, can make digital ecosystems 
work bet ter for everyone.  
The ‘Network for the Digital Inclusion of Older Persons’  represents a diverse group of 
stakeholders supporting the United Nation’s Secretary -General’s Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation. It calls for the global community to work together to  connect all people by 
the year 2030 by ensuring digital inclusion for all. The convenings of this Network were  
to identify successful models, potential solutions, and recommendations addressing 
digital inclusion barriers for older persons. Th e network of global experts explored 
accomplishing this task through partnerships, technologies, metrics, programs, and 
policies.  
 
Broadband Access  
 
Access to affordable high -speed internet is a major barrier to connectivity for older 
adults, especially in rural and low -income contexts. Developing countries lag behind 
high-income economies in infrastructure needed to get people online. Urban areas tend  
 
 
to have greater internet access than rural areas, and older adults tend to account for a 
higher proportion of the population in rural areas than in urban areas. Broadband 
accessibility can mitigate the challenges that older adults face and contribute to t he 
expansion of their engagement and participation in life.  
Internet access remains unaffordable for many around the world. For example, the 
average cost of fixed -broadband access in 2018 in Africa was equivalent to 64 percent  
of average monthly income. Adequate infrastructure, while necessary, is insufficient for 
closing the digital inclusion gap among older adults  if internet subscriptions remain 
financially out of reach.  
 
Recommendations  
Leverage  public private partnerships:  No single entity or sector can fix the 
broadband gap alone.   
Reframe broadband access in terms of economic gains : Demonstrating the 
additional benefits of broadband access, not strictly  the costs of its provision, can 
increase public and private sector support for increasing access.   
Access means more than infrastructure:  Research during the COVID -19 
pandemic suggests that broadband internet connectivity paired with training  leads 
to positive social outcomes for older adults who were previously offline.  
Increase  awareness  of benefits:  While a ccess to technology has become a human 
right, many older people lack access, and not know why it would provide benefit.  
Ensure m easurement  is written into p olicy:  “If you can’t measure it, you can’t 
achieve it .” 
Adopt a framework for measurement that spans five dimensions : Funding for 
expansion, regulatory constraints, availability, profitability & design (FRAPD).  
Promote models for public -private collaboration : The Alliance for an Affordable 
Internet  has global sponsors such as Google, Amazon, Cisco, Ericsson, Intel and 
Huawei, among many others, with efforts to expand low -cost access . 
 
Building Digital Skills  
 
Successful digital inclusion of older adults is dependent on providing individuals with the 
digital skills needed for an increasingly online world. People who learned to use digital 
technologies later in life often lag behind those who acquire  digital skills earlier in life 
 
 
such as how to use a computer, internet browser, and search engine. This can reduce the 
utility of online spaces for older adults or shut them out entirely. A 2021 survey of U.S. 
adults over 50, for example, found that 54 percent wanted better skills  to use digital 
devices but 37 percent said they lacked c onfidence in using technology. This skills gap 
can manifest in many ways in daily life, from an inability to access an online portal for 
public services, to failure to use mobile device reminders to take medication, to an 
inability to apply for a new job o r connect with a community group. The skills gap can 
lead to lower earnings as well as lowered consumption. Older adults are more likely to 
lack the basic digital skills that are critical for participation in many jobs, even when they  
possess  superior lit eracy and numeracy skills, compared to younger cohorts. Likewise, a 
disconnection from digital platforms can lead to a lack of awareness wherein individuals 
simply do not have access to information that could improve their lives, from 
opportunities for low -cost broadband access, to e -learning classes, to the tools to search 
for jobs online. A lack of trust also contributes to less participation online, as older age 
groups are often targets of and particularly concerned with cybercrime such as fraud and 
theft of personal information.  
 Recommendations   
Leverage varied points of entry : Successful training programs provide varied 
points of entry to older adults, meaning approaches that offer numerous options 
for contact and reflect the different skill sets of se niors.  
Involve trusted institutions : Learning opportunities work best when delivered by 
institutions that older adults are familiar with and tend to trust, such as a local 
library, religious network, or senior center .  
Tailor training : Optimizing the appro achability of training for older adults is critical 
to maximizing its uptake. To be effective, digital literacy programs require a 
programmatic framework that is well matched to the specific needs of a 
community and designed to boost the confidence of olde r users.  
Keep pace with new technology : Skills training tends to lag behind the latest 
technology, which leaves older  adults without the ability to properly use new 
devices or services, while old equipment may lack functionality or suffer from 
increased cy bersecurity risks.  
Effective scalable training requires a 3 -tiered approach:  1) a funder; 2) a 
curriculum provider and program manager ; and 3) a local delivery partner.   
Help overcome the stigma of learning something new : Try devices in broadly 
accessed locations like libraries and/or restaurants – within the comfort zone of 
older individuals who may be there already.  
 
 
Start with connection to friends and family : People want to learn in order to 
interact and play with gran dchildren  and people they love . 
Co-design new technology with the participation of older adults : Under the 
inclusive design mantra, “nothing for us, without us”.  
Create individual lifelong learning accounts : Example: a free educational service 
(with points) that matches interests at any age, enabling older adults to acquire 
skills or knowledge that improve their quality of life.  
Create a scalable digital navigator/ambassador role for older adults : Partnering 
with stor es to promote technology adoption  in different contexts.  
Build a ‘digital well’ : Create community access centers to deliver the usage and 
adoption resources they might need. A well symbolizes a place where people 
come and congregate to relieve thirst.   
Combat  ageism among tech and service providers : For example , provide 
terminology guide s for new users who “don’t speak ‘geek speak’”.  
Leverage skills of older persons to train others : Successes with one -on-one 
training on digital literacy, using older women to train their peers.  
Online Safety is a skill:  Digital literacy must include training individuals to protect 
themselves from fraud and exploitation online. Fraud is a global problem . 
Mirror tech literacy programs that focus on school -aged children : Example: 
Comcast Internet Essentials or OATS -provided training materials for low -income 
older adults, especially to expand Internet access.    
Leverage n ational organizations t hat support  wellness  and independence : 
Example:  The Veterans Administration in the US has various initiatives to expand 
broadband access to veterans with a special focus on telehealth.  
Volunteer Cyberacademy : This has been launched in 18 -19 countries abroad. 
Micro learnings are useful in training and education of young people and can work 
with older adults.  
Implement a system of social networks to help adoption:  Example: tech literacy 
in Japan  is notably high  and b aby boomers are relatively comfortable with 
technology . Japan has  networks to assist older people in the use of technology 
and accessing services.  
Add a national tech support help line for older adults:  Example : Israel has a 
national program for digital literacy for older adults that includes working with 
people who are homebound  and providing a free help desk for people who have 
completed skills training.  
 
 
 
Age-Inclusive Design  
 
Digital design processes often fail to account  for the many disparate needs and abilities 
of older adults. For example, nearly half  of older adults in the United States experience 
technological barriers that interfere with social connections. Rather than an inclusive 
approach to design that accommodates all, technology is almost always made to 
accommodate the modern general user who is already online and wel l adapted to the 
digital realm. The rare exception is assistive digital technology, which tends to offer a 
drastically different digital experience and reduced functionality.  
Between these two ends of the spectrum are many other levels of skill and ability  to use 
digital tools. Making a digital  world that works for everyone requires design processes 
that have everyone —including different demographics and  marginalized groups —in mind 
from the start.  
Ageism  can lead many to equate old age with inability, thus perpetuating  stereotypes 
and incorrect assumptions about aging populations, such as the false notion that older 
adults are ill -suited to the digital realm and incapable of using technology. Additionally, 
disabilities are prevalent among older adults —affecting more tha n 46 percent of those 
over 60 globally —and represent some of the primary hurdles for getting aging 
populations online and using digital devices. Older adults with disabilities face a vast 
array  of challenges, from visual and hearing loss to cognitive decli ne and learning 
limitations. Design process currently  marginalize and negatively impact older adults 
through the reduced functionality of digital devices or failure to cater  to specific needs.  
Devices and digital experiences are often simply not designed with older adults  in mind, 
and continued high ba rriers to using new and emerging products may discourage them 
from using digital  tools entirely.  
Recommendations  
Elevate design -for-all concepts : Companies and universities can achieve an 
optimal user experi ence for  people across age groups by being more intentional 
about the digital inclusion of older consumers and maintaining a  focus on the 
unique needs of 50 -plus users throughout the development process.  
Involve older adults : Similar to peer -training with digital skills, involving older 
adults in the product design lifecycle, including co -creation, testing and feedback, 
can break down misconceptions and expose challenges for a range of groups that 
may not be obvious to designers and developers.  
 
 
Include new  interfaces such as voice tech and natural language processes : 
Emerging technologies often mean o lder adult users will be more capable of 
controlling their devices.   
Emphasize ability:  At a broader level, age -inclusive design should be 
reconceptualized not as a burden but  as a route to enabling and accessing the 
unique skills of everyone, especially older adults.  
Consider the pace of change : The continuous cycle of updates creates adoption 
challenges, i nteroperability  issues, training challenges and general frustration.  
Form a consistent legislative approach to boosting age-inclusive design : Consider 
a parallel to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1980.  
Legislative initiatives need to include effective standards  that  build trust:  Spam 
laws are not doing a good job of preventing spam . 
Promote diversification and representation of older a dults in the private sector :  
Add older adults, including women, on boards  and to product design teams.  
Transfer the lessons learned from accessibility initiatives to design and testing 
for the aging market segment . 
Engage designers of products to teach older digital skills classes.  
Create age -friendly technology metrics to track adoption.  
Speak their language —literally and figuratively : Digital devices and services need 
to be attuned to local contexts . Governments and internet providers can ensure 
that digital products and resources are available in local  languages  
 
Cross -Cutting  Recommendations  
Focus on where inequalities are greatest:  Key to addressing development targets 
such as SDG -1 (ending  poverty) and SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth) is 
prioritizing those groups where disparities are most acute.  
Build coalitions : Digital inclusion of older adults is a shared responsibility 
requiring the collaboration of public,  private, and non -profit entities at local, 
national, and international levels . 
Recognize the business and social imperatives: By adopting strategies that 
address the gaps in digital access,  skills, and design, compani es can both further 
corporate social responsibility goals, by helping improve the  livelihoods of aging 
populations, and access a burgeoning new market opportunity.  
 
 
Develop consistent data and benchmarks:  Understanding of the global benefits 
of digital incl usion  and the national and regional gaps that persist is hindered by 
inconsistent data across and within countries, and  varying conceptions of what 
qualifies as adequate digital access.  
Utilize multiple metrics : Across access, affordability  and adoption  especially  
identifying the gap between access and usage . 
Measure digital readiness gaps : Crafting  population assessments possibly 
modeled on a Pew research report about the use of tech tools to pursue learning 
online, categorizing individuals from ‘least ready’ to ‘most ready.’   
Match financial incentives and programs connection to adoption: This is needed 
to ensure projects don’t fail due to poor access . 
Measure the connection between technology access and health equity : For 
example, use of technology that could address or assist for chronic conditions like 
diabetes, heart disease, or dementia. WHO i dentifies Social Determinants of 
Health (SDH), but these do not include technology access that could help manage 
chronic conditions.  
Uplift positive stories, both at individual and population levels:  For example , the 
Web Accessibility Initiative  offers stories about specific, vision, hearing, and 
cognitive limitations. W3C notes that that there are 1 billion people globally with 
disabilities and represent spending power of $1 trillion.  
Increasing points of entry : Stakeholders must offer a complete on -ramp to digital 
use and literacy, but one that has many doors of entry. Not everyone has some 
same goals – and may only need a subset of capabilities with limited features.  
Connect programs to the increased use of telehealth and remote patient 
monitoring (RP M): These changes require increased access to high-speed  Internet 
services, and/or smartphone devices for telehealth interactions.  
Help private sector participate and be part of the solution : Allowing other sectors 
and categories participate – the private sector should know that access is good 
business practice to help people use their technologies.   
 
Looking Ahead  
As much of daily life moves online —from work opportunities to essential services such as 
healthcare and banking —inclusion in the digital world has become critical to the 
wellbeing of people around the world. This is especially true for older adults, who face 
acute risks from exclusion from online spaces. As this anal ysis shows, digital inclusion is 
an area ripe for public -private collaboration, inclusive design, and innovation. Working 
 
 
together, governments, internet service providers, and other stakeholders, can support 
older adults to be healthy, fulfilled, and prod uctive in their later lives.  
 