  
 
 
 
Amazon Input  
Global Digital Compact  Public Consultation  
April 2023  
 
Amazon welcomes the opportunity to provide input into the UN’s Global Digital Compact (GDC) 
public consultation.  
 
Amazon supports the UN Secretary General’s vision for an inclusive, constructive GDC, which 
presents an important opportunity to facilitate a multi -stakeholder framework for thoughtful 
digital governance.  
 
-------  
Internet Governance  
Amazon has long supp orted the multi -stakeholder model of internet governance, including 
actively participating in and providing funding for the Internet Governance Forum (IGF).  
Therefore, we recommend that the UN commit in the GDC  to preserve and strengthen the multi -
stakeholder model, particularly by convincing Member States to ensure that UN policymaking 
processes must be more diverse, equitable, and inclusive, and that existing fora tasked with 
internet governance challenges, such as the IGF, are further stren gthened with appropriate 
human resources and funding. Meaningful participation of interested and informed stakeholders 
is essential to ensure that outcomes are both effective and accepted. It is particularly important 
to ensure the meaningful participation  of stakeholders from the global South and other typically 
under -represented groups in global public policymaking pertaining to the internet, including 
women.  
 
Avoid Internet Fragmentation  
The GDC should promote policies that s upport an open, interconnected, and interoperable 
internet.  
 
Laws that fail to consider the architecture of the internet and place barriers to global connectivity 
contribute towards a more fragmented internet. Such laws mainly focus on the deprivation of 
rights such as pr ivacy, data protection and free expression, which undergirds many fragmentation 
initiatives. Promoting these rights on a global basis can defend against the forces of 
fragmentation.  
 
Apply  Human Rights  Online  
Amazon is committed to ensuring the people, workers, and communities that support our entire 
value chain are treated with fundamental dignity and respect. We strive to ensure that the 
products and services we provide are produced in a way that respects human rights.  
While it is the duty of governments to protect human rights, Amazon recognizes our 
responsibility to respect and uphold internationally recognized human rights through the ethical 
treatment of our workforce and those within our value chain. Guided by the UN Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights, we commit to embedding respect for human rights 
  
 
 
throughout our business.  
 
We ask that the GDC  renew the commitment of Member States to protecting human rights both 
offline and online.  
 
Protect Data  
Amazon appreciates the UN’s interest in addressing digital trust and security online in the GDC . 
 
Amazon builds privacy into our services from the ground up. Many core features of the customer 
experience at Amazon depend on us using data responsibly and tr ansparently. Our customer -
centric approach has led us to follow privacy -by-design principles since our founding. We disclose 
in our privacy notice the types of data we collect and the limited circumstances in which we share 
customer data with third parties . 
 
We have a longstanding commitment at Amazon to preserve the trust of our customers and their 
families, and we have strict measures and protocols in place to protect their security and privacy.  
 
For example, we provide enriching digital experiences for kids, from easy -to-use controls to 
thoughtfully curated kids content, all built with trust by design.  
 
We believe protecting our customers' privacy is central to earning and keeping their trust. It's a 
top priority across Amazon, especially for the Alexa a nd Devices teams that work on privacy and 
security.  
 
While privacy has been core to how we designed  Alexa since day one , our mission is to 
continuously deliver incredibly delightful experiences for our customers while providing them 
with control and transp arency, keeping their information safe, and using their information 
responsibly to directly improve their experience. Every day, our teams are inventing to help solve 
unique privacy challenges presented by voice -first technology and AI. We have teams dedic ated 
to reviewing new devices and features to ensure that privacy is thoughtfully built into the product 
and experience. Our scientists and engineers invest in research and new machine learning 
techniques to further improve our technologies for privacy. We  challenge ourselves to think 
about new ways to give customers greater transparency and control over their Alexa experience.  
 
Additionally, at Amazon Web Services , customer trust is the top priority. We deliver services to 
millions of active customers, inc luding enterprises, educational institutions, and government 
agencies in  over 245 countries  and territories globally . Our customers include financial services 
providers, healthcare providers, and governmental agencies, who trust us with some of their 
most sensitive information.   
 
Organizations access state of the art, secure cloud services to innovate with speed and agility, 
and the international free flow of data is critical to accelerating this digital transformation. 
Enabling trusted cross -border data fl ows will promote digital inclusion and democratize access to 
  
 
 
digital technologies. Cloud  technologies and cross -border data flows have made it easier for 
people to access online services, including for education, healthcare and financial services. 
Business es in developing countries can also reach new markets and access the best technologies 
through cross -border data flows, fueling economic development and bridging digital divides.  
 
Trusted cross -border data flows can also promote innovation by enabling res earchers, 
entrepreneurs, and innovators to collaborate and share information across borders. This can lead 
to new breakthroughs in science, technology, and medicine, as well as new products and services 
that can improve people's lives and address global ch allenges such as climate change and 
sustainable development.  
 
The GDC should promote policies and regulatory approaches that enable trusted cross -border 
data flows that will help to fully unlock the potential of trusted cross -border data flows for 
economi c development and social good. Some examples include risk -based approaches to 
cybersecurity and strong, interoperable data protection frameworks. We recommend that the UN 
build on and complement best practices found in existing international frameworks suc h as 
principles that reinforce a shared commitment to promoting interoperability, high standard 
digital trade agreements, and regional frameworks (e.g. APEC Cross Border Privacy Rules System).  
 
Artificial Intelligence  
Artificial intelligence (AI) is one of the most transformational technologies of our generation and 
provides huge opportunities to be a force for good and drive economic growth. It can help 
scientists cure terminal diseases, engineers build inconceivable structures, and farmers yield 
more cr ops. AI allows us to make sense of our world as never before —and build products and 
services to address some of our most challenging problems, like climate change and responding 
to humanitarian disasters.  
 
While the benefits of AI are already plain to see and improving our lives each day, unlocking 
AI’s full potential will require building greater confidence among consumers. That means earning 
public trust that AI will be used responsibly and in a manner that is consistent with the rule of 
law, human rights , and the values of equity, privacy, and fairness.  
 
Understanding the important need for public trust, Amazon Web Services  works closely with 
policymakers around the world as they assess whether existing consumer protections remain fit -
for-purpose in an AI  era. An important baseline for any regulation must be to differentiate 
between high -risk AI applications and those that pose low -to-no risk. The great majority of AI 
applications fall in the latter category, and their widespread adoption provides opportun ities for 
immense productivity gains and, ultimately, improvements in human well -being. If we are to 
inspire public confidence in the overwhelmingly good, businesses must demonstrate they can 
confidently mitigate the potential risks of high -risk AI. The pu blic should be confident that these 
sorts of high -risk systems are safe, fair, appropriately transparent, privacy protective, and subject 
to appropriate oversight.  
 
  
 
 
We are committed to developing fair and accurate AI services and providing customers with t he 
tools and guidance needed to build applications responsibly. We recognize that responsible AI is 
the shared responsibility of all organizations that develop and deploy AI systems.  We also 
strongly support the development of international AI standards (such as the International 
Standards Organization/ISO) as  a means of controlling for AI risks, and of ensuring 
interoperability between regulatory approaches. The development of these standards should 
follow an open, multistakeholder approach as much as po ssible.  
 
As an active member of multi -stakeholder organizations such as the  OECD AI  working groups, 
the Partnership on AI , and the Responsible AI Insti tute, we partner with all stakeholders, 
including governments, in developing risk -based approaches to AI governance.  
  
As the U N considers AI in its development of its GDC , it should endorse and amplify the work 
done previously by the multi -stakeholder community, in particular the OECD’s AI Principles1 and 
the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology AI Risk Management Framework .2 
 
Connect All People to the Internet  
As a co mpany of inventors, we are well aware of the wondrous power of internet connectivity. 
Basic education, economic opportunity, and adequate healthcare increasingly rely on access to 
affordable, reliable broadband.  
 
That’s why we are  investing more than $10 billion to develop Project Kuiper , an advanced, low -
Earth orbit satellite broadband network that will provide fast, affordable broadband to unserved 
and underserved communities  around the world. We are excited about the benefits it will 
provide consumers, small businesses, local governments, educators, and rural and other 
traditionally disadvantaged communities.  
 
Project Kuiper will help close the digital divide by delivering affordable broadband with  speed and 
latency on par with traditional fiber networks  to a wide range of customers  in places that 
currently lack  reliable connectivity.   
 
Amazon remains committed to working with all interested partners that share our commitment 
to bridging the  digital divide .  Through strong commitments from both the private and public 
sectors, we believe we can achieve this goal.  
 
Therefore, we ask that the GDC  reaffirm the UN’s commitment to global connectivity, as well as 
promote policies that reduce access costs, are non -discriminatory, technology -neutral, and 
supportive of innovative business models and the development and deployment of a wide range 
of technologies, standards, a nd system architectures.   
 
 
                                                           
1 OECD AI Principles  
2 AI Risk Management Framework  
  
 
 
------  
Amazon looks forward to further engaging with the UN in its development of the GDC  and related 
activities, including the Summit for the Future.  