INTERNATIONAL 
ORDER & 
CONFLICT
REPORT
Global Governance, 
Justice & Security 
Program
Rethinking Global 
Cooperation
Three New Frameworks for Collective Action  
in an Age of Uncertainty
ABOUT THIS REPORT
In 2022, the growing impacts of climate change have been felt across the globe, from prolonged 
drought in the Middle East and North Africa, to erratic monsoons in South Asia and record-break -
ing heat waves in Europe and China. At the same time, the COVID-19 pandemic—which reached 
the tragic milestone of one million deaths within the first eight months of this year—and the 
ongoing war in Ukraine and other violent conflicts have impeded global progress toward the 
Sustainable Development Goals. To address these and other pressing global challenges, UN 
Secretary-General António Guterres called for, one year ago in his Our Common Agenda  report, a 
Summit of the Future to improve collective action worldwide. Among the summit’s anticipated 
outcomes are a Declaration on Future Generations, a Global Digital Compact, and a New Agenda 
for Peace. This report elaborates on the challenges, proposed major elements, and potential spoil -
ers to be overcome for each of these global policy frameworks. It further argues that meaningful 
civil society engagement in the summit’s preparations can reassure all stakeholders that decisions 
taken are well-informed, enjoy broad social ownership, and generate a sense of co-responsibility 
in supporting their implementation.
ABOUT STIMSON
The Stimson Center promotes international security and shared prosperity through applied re -
search and independent analysis, global engagement, and policy innovation.
For three decades, Stimson has been a leading voice on urgent global issues. Founded in the twi -
light years of the Cold War, the Stimson Center pioneered practical new steps toward stability and 
security in an uncertain world. Today, as changes in power and technology usher in a challenging 
new era, Stimson is at the forefront: Engaging new voices, generating innovative ideas and analysis, 
and building solutions to promote international security, prosperity, and justice. 
Stimson’s Global Governance, Justice & Security Program aims to advance more capable global 
and regional institutions to better cope with existing and emerging global challenges, and to cre -
ate new opportunities through effective multilateral action, including with the global business 
community and civil society. Visit the new Global Governance Innovation Network, a collabora -
tive project of the Stimson Center, Academic Council on the United Nations System (ACUNS), 
Plataforma CIPÓ, and Leiden University: https://ggin.stimson.org .
ABOUT THE DOHA FORUM 
The Doha Forum is a global platform for dialogue, bringing together leaders in policy to discuss 
critical challenges facing our world, and to build innovative and action-driven networks. Under the 
banner “Diplomacy, Dialogue, Diversity”, the Doha Forum promotes the interchange of ideas and 
discourse toward policymaking and action-oriented recommendations. In a world where borders 
are porous, our challenges and solutions are also interlinked.
STIMSON 
1211 Connecticut Avenue NW, 8th Floor, Washington, DC 20036  
Tel: 202.223.5956 | stimson.orgCopyright © September 2022, The Stimson Center and The Doha Forum.
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY iResearch Team and Acknowledgements
Research and Production Team
Richard Ponzio (Program Director), Nudhara Yusuf (Global Governance Innovation Network 
Facilitator), Muznah Siddiqui (Research Consultant), Joris Larik (Senior Advisor and Nonresident 
Fellow), Farwa Aamer (Research Analyst), William Durch (Editor and Distinguished Fellow), Lita 
Ledesma (Designer), Hasan Aloul (Webmaster), and Researchers: Ceyda Guleryuz and Gaurav 
Redhal. The Hamad Bin Khalifa University research team: Haya Faisal Al-Thani and Sharique 
Umar. The New School’s Graduate Program in International Affairs practicum research team: 
Madeleine Petersen, Nathaniel Oakes, and Jackson Ikenberry, and practicum supervisors: Natalie 
Briggs and Peter Hoffman.  
Acknowledgements
The Report Team wishes to express its appreciation for the support and encouragement provided by 
the following individuals: Lolwah Al-Khater, Nofe Al-Suwaidi, Sara Al-Saadi, Abdulaziz Al-Thani, 
Pippa Martin, Brian Finlay, Rachel Stohl, Oksana Bellas, Tia Jeffress, David Solimini, Ghanim Al-
Yafei, Maryam Al-Muhannadi, Safae El-Yaaquobi, Patrick Gallagher, Leslie Pal, Logan Cochrane, 
Maja Groff, Adriana Abdenur, Lise Howard, Magnus Jiborn, Jens Orback, Juan Ramón de la Fuente 
Ramírez, Flávio Damico, Danilo Türk, Maria Fernanda Espinosa, David Malone, Lise Grande, David 
Passarelli, Yu Ping Chan, Chelsea Payne, Jeanette Kwek, Claire Inder, Klara Wyrzykowska, Iain 
Levine, Richard Caplan, Vesselin Popovski, Alistair Edgar, Nazare Albuquerque, Craig Charney, 
Maiara Folly, Michael Collins, Adam Day, Maria Elena Agüero, Gabriel Amvane, Aisha Al-Ammari, 
Cristina Petcu, Marcel Pieper, Susanne Schmeier, Edna Ramirez-Robles, Agustina Briano, Vitorino 
Mello Oliveira, Kuniko Ashizawa, and Banou Arjomand. We further wish to express our gratitude 
to the following peer reviewers who provided helpful substantive feedback on earlier sections of 
the report: Robert Berg, David Bray, Andreas Bummel, Megan Corrado, Tad Daley, Debra Decker, 
Erin McCandless, Daniel Perell, Saji Prelis, and Necla Tschirgi.
We also wish to extend a special thank you to the State of Qatar for its partnership and generous 
financial support for Stimson’s Global Governance, Justice & Security Program, as well as our 
fellow founding co-sponsoring institutions of the new Global Governance Innovation Network: 
the Academic Council on the United Nations System, Plataforma CIPÓ, and Leiden University.
The Stimson Center’s policies on ethics, independence, and integrity are available at www.stimson.
org/about/transparency/ethics-independence /.
Related Publications
• Confronting the Crisis of Global Governance , The Report of the Commission on Global 
Security, Justice & Governance (2015)
• Just Security in an Undergoverned World  (2018)
• Reimagining Governance in a Multipolar World  (2019, co-published with the Doha Forum)
• UN 2.0: Ten Innovations for Global Governance – 75 Years beyond San Francisco  (2020)
• Beyond UN75: A Roadmap for Inclusive, Networked & Effective Global Governance  (2021)
• Building Back Together & Greener: Twenty Initiatives for a Just, Healthy, and Sustainable Global  
Recovery  (2021, co-published with the Doha Forum)
• Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the Future  (2022)
ii
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Foreword
While multiple, ongoing wars, climate change, and the COVID-19 pandemic continue to capture 
global headlines, the world has witnessed an increase of 150 million people affected by hunger 
since before the pandemic—a disturbing trend, arguably exacerbated by these “3-C’s”: conflict, 
a changing climate, and COVID. Meanwhile, the same cyberspace tools bringing unprecedented 
development opportunities to our hyperconnected world economy have precipitated the need for 
a new framework to regulate interstate relations to prevent and manage conflict across borders. 
The recent failure of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty review also signals an urgency for 
innovative governance approaches and institutions to foresee and better grapple with today’s 
global threats and challenges. 
Fortunately, a once-in-a-generation opportunity to review and dramatically improve tools for 
managing such enormous and complex problems worldwide, a Summit of the Future, will occur, 
in September 2024, during the General Assembly’s annual High-Level Week in New York by the 
United Nations’ 193 Member States, preceded by a ministerial meeting in September 2023.
Three global policy frameworks with the potential to focus and transform the summit’s agenda 
are a Declaration on Future Generations, a Global Digital Compact, and a New Agenda for Peace. 
Perhaps in a way incomparable to earlier, less globally-integrated generations, this is a time for 
imaginative thinking, skillful diplomacy and coalition-building, and—most of all—courage, in 
support of these and related proposals spearheaded by UN Secretary-General António Guterres. 
The stakes could not be higher.
We wish to express our appreciation to the authors of Rethinking Global Cooperation: Three New 
Frameworks for Collective Action in an Age of Uncertainty . This report, with its detailed analysis and 
elaboration of newly-recommended frameworks for future generations, digital cooperation, and 
peace, represents the latest annual intellectual collaboration between the Doha Forum and the 
Stimson Center. We hope it will inform a rich and open exchange of ideas and bolster efforts to 
achieve a more peaceful, just, and sustainable world. By rethinking global cooperation through 
novel and lasting partnerships, we can ensure that the future we want becomes a reality for today’s 
younger generation and all future generations.
Lolwah Al-Khater
Assistant Foreign Minister  
Executive-Director, Doha Forum
State of QatarBrian Finlay  
President and  
Chief Executive Officer  
Stimson Center
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY iiiContents
Research Team and Acknowledgements .................................................. i
Foreword  ........................................................................... ii
List of Abbreviations  .................................................................. v
Executive Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
I. Introduction: A Wake-up Call for the Planet   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
The Frameworks .................................................................... 4
Intersectionality of the Frameworks .................................................... 6
II. From Rethinking to Reforming: Conceptual Innovations 
and their Operationalization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
New Global Deal  .................................................................... 9
New Social Contracts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Networked, Inclusive, and Effective Multilateralism ...................................... 12
III. Representing Succeeding Generations through a Declaration on Future Generations   . . .15
IV. Facilitating an Open, Free, and Secure Digital Future for all 
through a Global Digital Compact  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
V. Advancing Inclusive and Just Peace through a New Agenda For Peace   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
VI. Road to the Summit of the Future   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
2023 or 2024? Why Timing Matters ................................................... 49
Advancing Future Generations, Digital Cooperation, and Peace on the Road 
to the Summit of the Future  .......................................................... 52
Civil Society’s Role in Maximizing the Summit of the Future ............................... 56
A Once-in-a-Generation Opportunity to Renew Global Governance ......................... 59
Endnotes  .......................................................................... 60
Annex 1: Illustrations of Our Common Agenda  Follow-up Discussions ...................... 67
Annex 1.1: Illustrative Highlights from Our Common Agenda  Follow-Up 
Negotiations on Future Generations ................................................... 67
Annex 1.2: Member States’ contributions during the PGA Thematic Consultations 
on the Global Digital Compact (February 21, 2022)  ..................................... 70
Annex 1.3: Member States’ contributions during the PGA Thematic Consultations 
on the New Agenda for Peace (February 21, 2022) ....................................... 71
Annex 2: List of resources on global governance innovation .............................. 72
Bibliography ........................................................................ 73
iv
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY List of Illustrations
Figures 
Figure 1.1 Displaced persons as of 2021: Number of people (in millions) ..................... 15
Figure 2.1: Pushing the thinking on global cooperation  ................................... 17
Figure 2.2: Parameters for Networked–Inclusive–Effective Multilateralism  ................ 20
Figure 3.1: Bottom twenty countries in the 2021 Global Commons Stewardship (GCS) Index ..24
Figure 3.2: Welsh National Well-Being Indicators Framework  ............................ 26
Figure 3.3: Illustration of dynamic interactions across generations ......................... 29
Figure 4.1: The relationship between technology and the SDGs  ............................ 34
Figure 4.2: Member States’ general consensus on possible Global Digital Compact themes ....37
Figure 5.1: New peace & security realities and challenges  ................................. 44
Figure 5.2:  Number of non-state-initiated violent conflicts since 1989 ...................... 45
Figure 5.3:  Armed conflict by type (1946 - 2021)  ......................................... 47
Figure 6.1: Roadmap to the 2023 Summit  ............................................... 63
Boxes
Box 3.1 Gaps in the international community’s current response ........................... 25
Box 6.1: Major Elements of the SOTF Modalities Resolution ............................... 57
Box 6.2: Global Policy Dialogue proposals for the Summit of the Future  .................... 64
Tables
Table 4.1: Responses from the international community to technological challenges ......... 36
Table 5.1: Past Invocations of Uniting for Peace and General Assembly Outcomes ............ 54
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY vList of Abbreviations
ACUNS Academic Council for the United Nations System
AI Artificial Intelligence
DPPA (UN) Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs 
FGR Future Generations Review
GCS Global Commons Stewardship
GDC Global Digital Compact
HIPPO High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
HLAB High-Level Advisory Board on Effective Multilateralism
HRFG Human Rights for Future Generations 
ICC International Criminal Court
ICJ International Court of Justice
ISI Intergenerational Solidarity Index
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
MSU DPPA’s Mediation Support Unit
NA4P New Agenda for Peace
NDC(s) Nationally Determined Contribution(s)
NIEM Networked, Inclusive, and Effective Multilateralism
OCA Our Common Agenda
PBC (UN) Peacebuilding Commission 
new PBC (UN) Peacebuilding Council 
PGA President of the United Nations General Assembly
R2P Responsibility to Protect
SDG(s) Sustainable Development Goal(s)
SOTF Summit of the Future
UK United Kingdom
UN United Nations
UN75 United Nations’ 75th anniversary
UNCSA  United Nations Collective Security Architecture
UNCLOS United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNGA United Nations General Assembly
UNHRC United Nations Human Rights Council
UNGA United Nations General Assembly
UPR  Universal Periodic Review
VNR  Voluntary National Review
YPS Youth, Peace and Security
1
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY In 2022, the growing impacts of climate change 
have been felt across the globe, from pro -
longed drought in the Middle East and North 
Africa, to erratic monsoons in South Asia and 
record-breaking heat waves in Europe and 
China. At the same time, the COVID-19 pan -
demic—which reached the tragic milestone of 
one million deaths within the first eight months 
of this year—and the ongoing war in Ukraine 
and other violent conflicts have impeded global 
progress toward the Sustainable Development 
Goals(SDGs). Global population affected by 
hunger rose to 828 million in 2021, a jump of 
150 million since before the pandemic. While 
technological advances wield the potential to 
help tackle global inequities, the lack of an in -
ternational framework regulating interstate re -
lations in cyberspace leaves a crucial gap in the 
management of conflict across borders; equal -
ly alarming is the failure of the recent Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty review conference to 
reach consensus on a substantive outcome.
To address these and other pressing global 
challenges, UN Secretary-General António 
Guterres presented to world leaders one year 
ago his seminal report, Our Common Agenda . 
In addition to providing conceptual innova -
tions—a new global deal, new social contracts, 
and networked, inclusive, and effective mul -
tilateralism—and a wealth of recommenda -
tions, he called for a “Summit of the Future” 
to improve governance arrangements in criti -
cal areas that urgently require more effective 
collective action worldwide; to rethink glob -
al cooperation in the face of  growing global 
competition, uncertainty, and anxiety. Among the September 2024 summit’s anticipated 
and potentially far-reaching outcomes are an 
overarching Pact for the Future, as well as a 
Declaration on Future Generations, a Global 
Digital Compact, and a New Agenda for Peace.
Convening the Summit of the Future in a way 
that complements next year’s “SDGs Summit” 
would recognize the gravity of the issues now 
undercutting the Sustainable Development 
Goals’ achievement. It would further high -
light the need for a more urgent and capable 
response by the world’s governance system to 
the rising risk of nuclear war and the growing 
realities of runaway climate change, resurgent 
poverty, and myriad threats to human rights. 
While the summit will not tackle the world’s 
most colossal problems overnight, it presents 
a rare, once-in-a-generation opportunity to 
achieve some high-profile wins in the near-
term, in order to generate momentum and im -
prove conditions for even more ambitious glob -
al governance innovations in years to come. 
This report’s companion study, Road to 2023: 
Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the Future  
(June 2022), presents twenty main recommen -
dations intended to encourage more ambitious, 
forward-looking thinking and deliberation on 
global governance renewal in the run-up to 
the Summit of the Future. In  this report, we 
elaborate on three of the most promising of 
these recommendations, which build in turn 
on ideas introduced initially in Our Common 
Agenda. Each of them pushes the boundaries 
of our thinking about the essential elements of 
future global cooperation:Executive Summary
“It would be difficult to fix the present crises and prevent new ones with the same mental -
ity and logic that led to their onset. Our challenges are clearly reinforcing each other. The 
best approach would be to seek systemic solutions and act across silos. … Concerning the 
Summit of the Future, it will be a major event … as proposed by the Secretary-General in his 
Our Common Agenda  report. … it will be one of the most significant undertakings of the UN, 
certainly the most important since Agenda 2030.”
—Ambassador Csaba Kőrösi, President of the 77th UN General Assembly1
2
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY T Declaration on Future Generations
Proclaiming the well-being of future genera -
tions as a global public good, a Declaration on 
Future Generations should be crafted with con -
sideration of:
• Legal Rights of and Obligations toward Future 
Generations : Providing legal recognition to the 
well-being of future generations requires that a 
“duty of care” is made explicit to which Member 
States can be held accountable. Globally, the 
connection between human well-being, our nat -
ural environment, and human rights was made 
ever clearer in the recent, historic UN General 
Assembly resolution that declared access to a 
clean and healthy environment to be a universal 
human right.
• Realigning Political Incentives in Support of 
Future Citizens : Realigning priorities and re -
newing intergenerational solidarity could be 
done through existing institutional mecha -
nisms, such as evaluating the impact of UN 
resolutions on future generations (and then 
amending them as necessary) and strengthen -
ing national capacities for mainstreaming the 
interests and needs of future generations (in -
cluding foresight-based national policymaking 
supported by forward-thinking legal, political, 
economic, and environmental research).
• Youth, Agenda 2030, and Beyond : The cross-cut -
ting Sustainable Development Goals lay the 
foundation for thriving youth populations today 
and determine the opportunities they face as 
they grow into the adults of tomorrow. Such re -
sponsibilities toward young people must be in -
herent in a Declaration on Future Generations, 
as each generation must confront the challeng -
es and opportunities of youth.
A repurposed Trusteeship Council or Steward -
ship Council, a Futures Lab, a universal peri -
odic review mechanism and Intergenerational 
Sustainability Index, and a Special Envoy for 
Future Generations could all support the dec -
laration’s implementation.
T Global Digital Compact
Rapid advancements in technology pose ever 
increasing risks to the protection of human 
rights, even as they create opportunities for development. The absence of a holistic, net -
worked, and multilateral approach to techno -
logical governance necessitates a Global Digital 
Compact based on a framework that addresses 
three key dimensions of the technological life -
cycle (the “3-I’s”):
• Innovation : Ensure that technological devel -
opment, from ideation and sourcing to creation 
and deployment, strives to promote public in -
terests, safeguards environmental sustainabil -
ity, and adheres to basic human rights norms.
• Infrastructure : Foster universal access and 
connectivity to technological infrastructure 
and the Internet; adherence to Agenda 2030 
also means that such infrastructure should be 
environmentally sustainable and secure.
• Information : Verify that the development or 
ownership of technology does not adversely 
impact human rights and confirm that human 
rights apply equally online.
T New Agenda for Peace
The spirit of the original, 1992 Agenda for Peace 
can be recaptured by a new and dynamic ap -
proach to sustaining peace, and promoting a mu -
tually reinforcing approach to justice and secu -
rity in the twenty-first century, that focuses on: 
• Prevention : Reinvigorated conflict preven -
tion at local, regional, and international lev -
els could prioritize new foresight capabilities, 
an enhanced political role for UN Resident 
Coordinators, a new Peacebuilding Commission 
audit tool, and disarmament.
• The Changing Nature of Conflict : Climate 
change and water security, cyber-warfare (in -
cluding disinformation and misinformation), 
and the two-way interplay between sustainable 
security and a healthy global commons all merit 
special attention.
• Inclusiveness : Innovate the Women, Peace & 
Security and Youth, Peace & Security agendas 
through targeted investments in education 
and a policy opportunity approach that trans -
forms the violence of exclusion into trust and 
partnerships. 
• UN Collective Security Architecture reform : 
Strengthen the Security Council, General 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 3Assembly, and Peacebuilding Commission, 
and adopt the Secretary-General’s proposed 
Emergency Platform, through membership re -
configurations, new tools, and new modes of 
non-traditional engagement with regional or -
ganizations, local organizations, and non-state 
actors that contribute to peacemaking, peace -
keeping, and peacebuilding.
Road to the Summit of the Future
Each of the three global policy frameworks 
proposed above would benefit from the forma -
tion of a task force or committee, led by one 
UN Permanent Representative from the Global 
North and one from the Global South, placed 
under one of the Pact for the Future’s pro -
posed thematic pillars and given the requisite 
UN Secretariat support. Independent research 
should also be commissioned from academics 
and policy researchers to inform the task forces’ 
work, and the substantive inputs and perspec -
tives of other diverse actors across civil society 
should be sought.
Given the sheer complexities, large number of 
policy issues to be deliberated upon, and the 
accelerated time-frame for the 2024 Summit 
of the Future, preceded by a September 2023 
preparatory ministerial meeting, civil society 
groups could play a constructive role in the 
finalizing of ambitious goals within the Pact 
for the Future and associated policy frame -
works. Meaningful civil society engagement, 
in the spirit of more networked, inclusive, 
and effective multilateralism in the summit’s 
preparations, can reassure all stakeholders that decisions taken are well-informed, enjoy broad 
social ownership, and generate a sense of co-re -
sponsibility in supporting their implementation. 
Such collaboration could include: 
• Ensuring that the intergovernmental negotia -
tions both welcome and deliberate on substan -
tive inputs provided by scholars, non-govern -
mental organizations, major groups, business 
leaders, and parliamentarians.
• Opening formal negotiations to public 
observation.
• Supporting national, regional, and global 
multistakeholder forums in the run-up to the 
summit.
• Encouraging the involvement of civil society 
and parliamentarians in the national delega -
tions preparing for the summit.
The aspirations of billions worldwide grow in 
favor of change toward a system of global gov -
ernance that values cooperation over discord, 
global policy based on scientific evidence over 
fragmentation and disinformation, and, most 
of all, the embrace of human dignity and a rich 
notion of positive peace, where all peoples and 
nations have to live in free, safe, and habitable 
societies in harmony with both nature and their 
neighbors—now and in the long-term. But with -
out the institutional and normative reforms we 
need mobilized through a high-ambition coali -
tion of states, businesses, and civil society part -
ners, “the future we want” will soon be out of 
reach for us and lost to posterity for good.Convening the Summit of the Future in a way that 
complements next year’s “SDGs Summit” would 
recognize the gravity of the issues now undercutting 
the SDGs’ achievement. It would further highlight 
the … rising risk of nuclear war and the growing 
realities of runaway climate change … and myriad 
threats to human rights.
4
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY I. Introduction: A Wake-up Call for the Planet
“Our Common Agenda  was intended as a wake-up call. One year on, we must ask ourselves:  
Have we woken up?”  —António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations2
The year 2020 marked the 75th Anniversary of 
the UN (UN75). On this occasion, Secretary-
General António Guterres shared his vision 
to prepare the United Nations for twenty-first 
century needs and challenges. A UN75 Global 
Conversation with civil society and survey of 
“We the Peoples” helped to craft a UN75 Political 
Declaration, which was adopted by Member 
States and identified twelve global priority ar -
eas with an eye to the centenary of the world 
organization in 2045.3 The declaration also called 
for the Secretary-General to report back, within 
a year, on recommendations to advance these 
priorities, which ushered in his September 2021 
report, Our Common Agenda  (OCA).4  
The OCA report offered some ninety wide-rang -
ing recommendations organized around eight 
“high-level tracks.”5 Perhaps the most signifi -
cant was a proposal for a Summit of the Future 
(SOTF) to “advance ideas for governance ar -
rangements in the areas of international con -
cern mentioned in [Our Common Agenda] , and 
potentially others …”6 The summit’s chief out -
come document, a “Pact for the Future”, could 
serve as a vehicle for building consensus among 
UN Member States around many of the OCA’s 
recommendations across the UN’s three main 
pillars, namely peace and security, sustainable 
development, and human rights. It could ei -
ther incorporate or operate as a chapeau and 
overarching document that underscores sev -
eral complementary global policy frameworks 
for consideration at the summit, including a 
Declaration on Future Generations, a Global 
Digital Compact, and a New Agenda for Peace.
In November 2021, Member States lent their 
support to the OCA in a consensus resolution. 
Through its  three operative clauses, the resolu -
tion welcomed the Our Common Agenda report’s 
further consideration by Member States and 
requested the Secretary-General’s support in its follow-through. Member States then called 
on the President of the General Assembly to 
initiate “inclusive intergovernmental consid -
eration of the various proposals, options, and 
potential means of implementation … in col -
laboration with all relevant partners,” creating 
a legitimate entry point for multistakeholder 
inputs in taking the OCA forward (see annex 
1 for details on these negotiations across the 
three proposed global policy frameworks).7 
This report is the companion volume to Road to 
2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for The 
Future , which was published, in June 2022, with 
the aim of encouraging more forward-looking 
and ambitious deliberation on global gover -
nance renewal, and paving the way for innova -
tive solutions to global challenges in the run-up 
to the SOTF, now planned for September 2024.8 
It draws from  the expertise and experiences of 
the Stimson Center and Doha Forum and builds 
on their collaborative research and policy di -
alogues over the past four years.9 This report 
aims to contribute independent expert per -
spectives and a strategic outlook to the ongoing 
preparations for the Summit of the Future, with 
a view to amplifying the Secretary-General’s 
“wake-up call” issued one year ago with the re -
lease of his Our Common Agenda report. 
The Frameworks
This report  focuses on three of the proposed 
“tracks” for the Summit of The Future with the 
potential to become new and lasting frame -
works for future global policymaking, namely: 
a Declaration on Future Generations, a Global 
Digital Compact, and a New Agenda for Peace 
(note: the summit’s overarching “Pact for the 
Future” outcome document is addressed at 
length in Stimson’s Road to 2023 report). Each is 
contextualized in light of the conceptual inno -
vations underpinning the OCA—a new global 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 5
Cooperation is paramount to increasing our 
awareness of the connections, implications, and 
impacts of governance decisions. It is especially 
needed to address … the challenges posed by 
today’s global environmental, socioeconomic, 
technological, and political-security megatrends.
deal, new social contracts, and networked, in -
clusive, and effective multilateralism. For each 
framework, the report subsequently delves into 
identified current gaps in global governance, 
analyzing the international community’s re -
sponses to those gaps, and making recommen -
dations on how they can close them. It aims to:
1. Catalyze ambition and offer concrete rec -
ommendations where a level of consensus 
is starting to emerge  (especially for the UN’s 
Declaration on Future Generations);
2. Add structured analysis to ideas and prin -
ciples that have gained or are gaining sup -
port on the global agend a (especially for the 
UN’s Global Digital Compact); and
3. Revisit earlier frameworks and offer new 
insights and proposals to keep up with 
changing global threats and challenges  (es-
pecially for the UN’s New Agenda for Peace).
T A Declaration on Future Generations
An Elements Paper for the Declaration on Fu -
ture Generations has been presented to Mem -
ber States, in a process co-facilitated by Fiji and 
the Netherlands. Hence, the objective of section 
III of the report is to provoke further reflection 
and to raise ambitions, grounded in practical 
means for implementation and operationaliza -
tion, heading into the full intergovernmental 
negotiations that will follow UN General As -
sembly High-Level Week 2022. 
Section III, therefore, presents the well-being of 
future generations as a global public good and 
considers the legal, political, and moral prisms of 
a Declaration on Future Generations, alongside its implications for existing global priorities such 
as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
the Addis Ababa Financing for Development 
Action Agenda, and the Paris Climate Agreement. 
Moreover, the section proposes practical ele -
ments that would support the success of such a 
declaration’s implementation, through a Special 
Envoy for Future Generations, a universal peri -
odic review and Intergenerational Sustainability 
Index, and a repurposed Trusteeship Council or 
Stewardship Council.
T A Global Digital Compact
With the appointment of a new UN Tech 
Envoy, Amandeep Singh Gill, the Global Digital 
Compact (GDC) is expected to take shape 
through a multistakeholder process in the up -
coming months. Importantly, as an intergov -
ernmental negotiated compact (informed by 
simultaneous multistakeholder consultations), 
it should build upon and reinforce existing 
initiatives in digital governance, including the 
2020 UN Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.10 
Given the rapid advances and increasing market 
and political forces in the digital space, section 
IV of this report explores a holistic, networked, 
and multilateral approach to the Global Digital 
Compact, based on the “3-Is”—innovation, in -
frastructure, and information—of the techno -
logical life cycle. 
T A New Agenda for Peace 
Current global crises and violent conflicts 
have exposed current gaps in the UN’s collec -
tive security architecture. While the need for 
change garners widespread support, this has 
6
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY given rise to essentially operational shifts (for 
example, improvements in the functioning of 
UN peacekeeping and other conflict manage -
ment tools) rather than equally important po -
litical, economic, and moral transformations. 
A more fundamental shift in the way peace is 
understood and in the way it can be seeded 
and sustained needs to take place. As called 
for in the Our Common Agenda  report, this 
requires an ambitious overhaul of the 1992 
Agenda for Peace. 
Such a global normative update, however, re -
quires a synthesis of the latest academic re -
search, policy lessons learned, and analysis of 
the major global political faultlines. Section 
V of the report embarks on this endeavor and 
examines four fundamental drivers of a New 
Agenda for Peace: the need to innovate ap -
proaches to prevention, the changing nature 
of conflict, empowering women and youth in 
peacebuilding, and reforming the UN’s collec -
tive security architecture.
Intersectionality of  
the Frameworks 
It is important to note from the outset that these 
three policy frameworks do not exist in isola -
tion. Each interacts with the others, and with 
wider global challenges and responses to them. 
For example, the rise of cyberwarfare confronts 
both digital governance and twenty-first cen -
tury platforms for peace. Equally, both conflict 
and digital access have direct and deep impacts 
on the challenges and opportunities faced by 
youth, who play an important transitive role 
in the well-being of future generations. Finally, 
all of these frameworks cross-fertilize with the 
Sustainable Development Goals, the “triple plan -
etary crisis” flagged by the OCA report (namely, 
climate change, biodiversity loss, and pollution),11 
and the global financial architecture. 
These intersectional relationships are reflect -
ed throughout Rethinking Global Cooperation . 
The key message for the reader is that in 
today’s increasingly interconnected world, 
cooperation is paramount to increasing our 
awareness of the connections, implications, 
and impacts of governance decisions. It is 
especially needed to address effectively the challenges posed by today’s global environ -
mental, socioeconomic, technological, and 
political-security megatrends.
Environmental Trends 
In 2022, the growing impacts of climate change 
have been felt across the globe, from prolonged 
drought in the Middle East and North Africa 
to erratic monsoons in South Asia and re -
cord-breaking heat waves in Europe and China.12 
Undeniably, the data and evidence available are 
only able to capture the tip of a rapidly vanish -
ing iceberg: global warming is likely to reach 1.5° 
Celsius after 2030, but record swaths of global 
forest are already alight; moreover, half of the 
most climate-fragile countries already suffer 
from conflict.13 The Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), in its recent sixth 
assessment report, argued the need for urgent 
adaptation, integrated global efforts to combat 
the growing climate crisis, and climate-resilient 
development across the globe.14
Notable advancements in international climate 
action include an increased focus on aligning 
the SDGs with the 2015 Paris Agreement and the 
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015-2030.15 The UN General Assembly, in a 
historic resolution in August 2022, declared 
access to a clean and healthy environment as a 
universal human right.16 However, the urgency 
of the intensifying crisis and related environ -
mental crises, such as deforestation, beckon a 
more rapid, coordinated, and comprehensive 
response that moves beyond mere rhetoric and 
implements policies with consideration for both 
present and future generations.17
Socioeconomic Trends
The COVID-19 pandemic—which reached the 
tragic milestone of one million deaths within 
the first eight months of 2022—and the ongoing 
war in Ukraine have significantly impeded glob -
al progress toward the Sustainable Development 
Goals.18 Global populations affected by hunger 
rose to 828 million in 2021, a jump of 150 million 
since before the pandemic, and 670 million peo -
ple will still face hunger in 2030, even if global 
economic recovery is stepped-up.19 Regions in 
the Global South such as Africa felt the heaviest 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 7
impact; approximately 20 percent of the popu -
lation was hunger-stricken in 2021.20 Worldwide, 
nearly 32 percent of women were moderately or 
severely food insecure, compared with about 
28 percent of men.21 Global inflation driven 
by rising food and energy prices and lingering 
supply-demand imbalances was projected to 
reach 6.6 percent in advanced economies and 
9.5 percent in emerging market and developing 
economies in 2022.22 Food price inflation, at 15 
percent, has been especially hard for lower-in -
come households who spend approximately 50 
percent of their income on food.23 Sixty percent 
of low-income countries are at a high risk of or 
are already in debt distress, up from 30 percent 
in 2015.24 In the eighty-one countries where the 
UN World Food Programme works, acute hun -
ger is projected to increase from 276 million 
to 323 million, with the steepest rise expected 
in Sub-Saharan Africa if Russia’s war against 
Ukraine continues in 2022.25 
Adverse global growth patterns make the fu -
ture outlook even more concerning. Economic 
growth is expected to slump from 5.7 percent 
in 2021 to 2.9 percent in 2022, significantly low -
er than the 4.1 percent that was anticipated in 
January 2022.26 The World Employment and 
Social Outlook report projects that global un -
employment will stand at 207 million in 2022, 
surpassing its pre-pandemic level.27 
Technological Trends 
Better life expectancy, increased overall eco -
nomic growth, and decreased global poverty, 
which have improved global living standards 
in recent decades, could be attributed, in part, 
to technological advancements. However, this change is rarely linear and not always positive, 
affected by the inevitable challenges which 
arise from technological developments mov -
ing faster than public policy. Cyberspace, for 
instance, already poses a challenge to our un -
derstanding of the use of force, and the lack of 
an international framework regulating inter -
state relations in cyberspace leaves a crucial 
gap in international conflict management.28 The 
ubiquity of Big Data suggests how fast change is 
happening.29 From managing pandemics, such 
as COVID-19, to climate change and human 
rights, the advancement and regulation of data 
increasingly impacts all aspects of human life. 
The “metaverse,” for instance, is believed to be 
the next evolution of the Internet, laying the 
foundation for an ever more realistic-seeming 
and immersive digital world.30 As a result, “its 
disruptive potential could have significant im -
pacts on society as technologies become more 
widespread and sophisticated.”31
As technological shifts lead to changes in our 
understanding of crucial concepts such as in -
ternational peace and security and sustainable 
development, socio-technological progress has 
become increasingly dependent on our ability 
to create global frameworks for digital gover -
nance that support an effective architecture 
for multistakeholder cooperation in techno -
logical innovation.
Political-Security Trends 
The current geopolitical landscape is marked 
by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, China’s 
threat to Taiwanese autonomy, protracted 
civil wars in Yemen and Ethiopia, the human -
itarian crisis in Myanmar and Afghanistan, 
The linkages between challenges and their 
multifaceted repercussions behoove international 
governance to move beyond narrow, reductionist 
approaches to a more cooperative and cohesive 
modus operandi.
8
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY and the diplomatic stalemate over Iran’s 
nuclear program. With many of the world’s 
major powers at odds, global security is in a 
perilous state. 
In addition to climate, cyber, and other risks to 
international and human  security, traditional 
military-based security continues to be a cen -
tral cause for concern. The invasion of Ukraine, 
for example, has revived debate on disarma -
ment and the need to place greater restraints 
on global nuclear threats.32 Not since the end 
of the Cold War, arguably, has the specter of 
nuclear weapons use seemed so real, and the 
review of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, 
in August 2022 in New York, failed to reach 
consensus on a “substantive outcome.”33 The 
disruptive impact of war—whether interstate 
or internal—is most visible in the staggering 
numbers of forcibly displaced people. In 2021, 
UNHRC estimated that, for the first time in 
recorded history, the number of those forcibly 
displaced reached 89.3 million, of whom over 
some 53 million were displaced within their 
own countries (figure 1.1). **
The identified global trends highlight how 
concepts can no longer be deliberated upon 
within silos. The linkages between challenges 
and their multifaceted repercussions behoove 
international governance to move beyond nar -
row, reductionist approaches to a more coop -
erative and cohesive modus operandi. How the 
proposed Declaration on Future Generations, 
Global Digital Compact, and New Agenda for 
Peace can serve as key drivers in the opera -
tionalization of Our Common Agenda’s  con -
ceptual innovations (including a new global 
deal, new social contracts, and networked, 
inclusive, and effective multilateralism) is 
addressed in the next section. Subsequently, 
sections III through V of this report focus on 
these three global policy frameworks, detailing 
their targeted challenges, proposed major ele -
ments, and potential spoilers to be overcome. 
The report’s concluding section VI turns to a 
strategy for reform and implementation of the 
three frameworks by fully leveraging the 2024 
Summit of the Future during UN High-Level 
Week in New York.Figure 1.1: Displaced persons as of 2021: Number of people (in millions)
Source:  UNHCR Refugee Population Statistics Database . Data as of June 16, 2022.  Total forcibly  
displacedInternally 
displaced 
personsRefugeesAsylum-
seekersVenezuelans 
displaced 
abroad
2021
2020
2019
2018
2017
2016
201589.3m
80.1m
79.4m
73.3m
68.4m
65.5m
65m53.2m
45.7m
45.7m
41.3m
39.9m
40.2m
40.5m27.1m 4.6m 4.4m
26.4m 4.2m 3.9m
26m 4.1m 3.6m
25.9m 3.5m 2.6m
25.4m 3.1m
22.5m 2.7m
21.4m 3.2m
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 9
II. From Rethinking to Reforming: Conceptual 
Innovations and their Operationalization
“As curtains are raised and as the sun shines upon dark places, what was previously invisi -
ble comes into view. Technology has turned our world into one interconnected neighbor -
hood. What happens in one place is seen in every corner, and there has been no better time 
for the spread of peace, democracy and their attending social justice and fairness for all.”  
—Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia and Nobel Peace Laureate34
This section outlines the three main conceptu -
al innovations expounded in the Our Common 
Agenda  report—a new global deal, new social 
contracts, and networked, inclusive, and effec -
tive multilateralism (NIEM). It discusses, fur -
thermore, how each of the three global policy 
frameworks on which this report focuses—a 
Declaration on Future Generations, Global 
Digital Compact, and New Agenda for Peace—
can play a pivotal role in operationalizing each 
of these foundational concepts, thereby making 
important contributions to pushing the bound -
aries of our thinking about global cooperation 
(figure 2.1).
While the importance of military and economic 
power in international relations is undeniable, 
the power of ideas, concepts, and narratives is 
no less significant. Powerful concepts, such as 
sovereignty and territorial integrity, help coun -
tries that are threatened by stronger neighbors 
to justify their defensive actions and garner 
the support of the international community. 
Concepts such as sustainable development help 
to overcome seemingly irreconcilable positions, 
such as between those calling for environmen -
tal conservation and those calling for economic 
development.35 The concept of human securi -
ty further  reveals the different dimensions 
of security at a human level, thereby bridging 
resources on national security and human de -
velopment.36 Similarly, albeit arguably less suc -
cessfully, the responsibility to protect (R2P) 
concept was introduced, in 2001, to overcome 
the tension between the principle of non-inter -
vention into a country’s internal affairs and the 
imperative of preventing mass atrocities.37 Hence, the importance of ideas, concepts, and 
narratives should not be underestimated when 
reforming global cooperation in the wake of 
the UN75 Declaration and the Our Common 
Agenda  report. The UN75 Declaration served to 
recommit the Member States to core principles 
of their cooperation. With the crisis of global 
governance and the onslaught against interna -
tional institutions and agreements of the past 
years,38 followed by a global pandemic that saw 
the emergence of “vaccine nationalism,”39 such 
a recommitment was direly needed.
Beyond highlighting commitments to norms 
that already existed—and some of which con -
tinue to be violated by powerful actors—new 
conceptual frameworks are needed urgently 
to underpin and guide the efforts toward “the 
future we want, and the United Nations we 
need.”40 In recent years,41 UN Secretary-General 
António Guterres has developed a number of 
such innovations, each crystalized in the OCA 
and now anticipated to serve as “conceptual 
cornerstones” of the Summit of the Future and 
its accompanying Pact for the Future.42
New Global Deal
The Our Common Agenda  report calls for “a se -
rious renewal of the principles and practices of 
collective action at the global level …, building on 
what is working and what has been achieved.”43 It 
notes further that the objectives of this collective 
action are, to a large extent, already defined by 
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
and the UN75 Declaration. Hence, the New 
Global Deal serves to achieve the SDGs,44 on 
the basis of the principles set out in the UN75 
Declaration. The New Global Deal, moreover, is 
10
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Figure 2.1: Pushing the thinking on global cooperation
Source:  Original Graphic, Stimson Center. 
to complement and strengthen the inauguration 
of new social contracts (see next sub-section) at 
the (sub)national level.45 Whether the aim here 
is redistribution of resources or representation 
in global bodies is not  entirely clear. At his 2020 
Nelson Mandela Lecture, the Secretary-General 
had still stressed the need for “redistribution of 
power, wealth, and opportunities” in the world 
in 2020.46 However, the redistributive dimension 
of the New Global Deal is not as fleshed out in 
the OCA report. Only the need to better “priori -
tize” the use of resources internationally, along -
side the need to pool resources to deliver pub -
lic goods at the national level, are mentioned.47 
It does, however, note that the majority of UN 
Member States think that the Security Council 
“could be made more representative of the twen -
ty-first century, such as through enlargement, 
including better representation for Africa.”48
The New Global Deal is anchored in the twin 
concepts of the global commons and global pub -
lic goods. According to the Our Common Agenda  
report, the global commons “refer to natural or 
cultural resources that are shared by and bene -
fit us all” and include the high seas, atmosphere, Antarctica, and outer space as areas beyond na -
tional jurisdiction.49 While some consider cyber 
space to be among the global commons,50 the 
OCA report refers to the “digital commons as 
a global public good.”51 
Global public goods, in turn, are characterized 
by the fact that “they cannot be adequately pro -
vided by any one State acting alone, and they 
concern the welfare of humanity as a whole,” 
including global health, science, and peace.52 In 
scholarship, global public goods have been con -
sidered to be marked by “non-excludability” and 
“non-rivalry,”53 meaning that they are available 
to all and can be enjoyed repeatedly without 
diminishing the benefits for others, which may 
be an “ideal type,”54 rather than reality. These 
characteristics are, however, not underscored 
in the OCA report; rather it observes that there 
are no “agreed definitions” for either the global 
commons or global public goods.55
The Declaration on Future Generations  can 
operationalize the New Global Deal in import -
ant ways, seeing that the latter is supposed to 
“support solidarity within societies and between Current thinking on 
global cooperation
NEW SOCIAL 
CONTRACTSNEW  
GLOBAL DEALNETWORKED, INCLUSIVE & EFFECTIVE MULTILATERALISM
New 
Digital 
Compact
New 
Agenda 
for Peace
Decl. on  
 Future 
Generations
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 11
generations.”56 Most importantly, it can en -
trench the intergenerational dimension of glob -
al public goods, and even recast the well-being 
of future generations as a global public good in 
its own right. Elaborating on their definition of 
global public goods, Kaul and others have ex -
plained that they should at least meet “the needs 
of current generations without foreclosing de -
velopment options for future generations.”57 A 
similar consideration applies to the global com -
mons, the uses of which for future generations 
are threatened—potentially irreversibly—by  
plastic pollution, combustion of fossil fuels, cli -
mate change, and orbital debris, among others. 
This reasoning remains at the heart of the con -
cept of sustainable development too, defined 
as “development that meets the needs of the 
present generation without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs.”58 Such a declaration would serve as a 
normative platform for the various institutional 
recommendations on enhancing the voices of 
youth and better representing the interests of 
future generations. For their part, these insti -
tutional innovations could become operational 
platforms to mainstream and further develop 
the narrative of a new global deal. 
Moreover, the Global Digital Compact  can spell 
out concrete ways on how to help preserve and 
improve the digital commons as a key global 
public good. In particular, this refers to the 
principle of neutrality in the operation of the 
internet as a global public good. It can further -
more reveal linkages with other global public 
goods, such as delivering peace and security 
online by preventing cyber attacks and cyber 
crime. Fleshing out ways to close the global dig -
ital divide would also represent the spirit of the 
new global deal, enhancing the opportunities 
of billions of people currently unconnected to 
the Internet.
Finally, the New Agenda for Peace  has the po -
tential of becoming a cornerstone in delivering 
peace  as “one of the principal global public 
goods the United Nations was established to 
deliver.”59 Adopting a broad understanding of 
peace, known as “positive peace,” goes beyond 
the mere absence of violent conflict to include 
the building of inclusive and just governing structures rooted in the rule of law. A broad 
conception of peace further applies to the glob -
al and digital commons, which are increasingly 
seen as theaters of great power competition and 
where the reduction of strategic risks is imper -
ative. Providing peace relates to the provision 
of other global public goods. In the absence of 
peace, for instance, public health suffers while 
disinformation thrives.
New Social Contracts
The Our Common Agenda  report defines social 
contracts as “the understanding within a soci -
ety of how people solve shared problems, man -
age risks, and pool resources to deliver public 
goods, as well as how their collective institu -
tions and norms operate.”60 It observes “a grow -
ing disconnect between people and the insti -
tutions that serve them, with many feeling left 
behind and no longer confident that the system 
is working for them, an increase in social move -
ments and protests and an ever deeper crisis 
of trust fomented by a loss of shared truth and 
understanding.”61 The COVID-19 pandemic has 
undeniably had a catalytic effect on this trend, 
which exerted enormous pressures on national 
health systems and torn at the fiber of societies 
at large, while also galvanizing thinking on eq -
uitable recoveries and post-pandemic reforms.62 
The OCA report, therefore, calls for a renewed 
social contract at the (sub)national level. 
The Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda  
sees a “strong social contract anchored in hu -
man rights at the national level” as the neces -
sary foundation for international cooperation.63 
Hence, there is a mutually reinforcing relation -
ship between the new social contracts and the 
Global New Deal, with the latter complementing 
the former and the former facilitating the latter. 
As foundations for a renewed social contract 
within societies, the OCA report proposes three 
foundations: “(a) trust; (b) inclusion, protec -
tion and participation; and (c) measuring and 
valuing what matters to people and the planet.”64 
The three global policy frameworks detailed in 
this report are crucial for bringing about and 
entrenching these new social contracts. 
Regarding the Declaration on Future Gen -
erations , according to the OCA report, 
12
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY intergenerational solidarity is not just a matter 
for the global new deal, but it needs to be ex -
pressed at the national level in new social con -
tracts,65 which is in keeping also with indigenous 
philosophies on intergenerational justice.66 The 
declaration, which is to be grounded in human 
rights (including the recently recognised right 
to a clean and healthy environment that future 
generations should have the ability to avail),  can 
highlight and flesh out how intergenerational 
equity can be pursued at the national level.67 
Moreover, it can demonstrate how—through 
the Global New Deal—the international com -
munity can help states achieve this. This will be 
particularly important seeing that young peo -
ple “feel that our political, social and economic 
systems ignore their present and sacrifice their 
future.”68 The Declaration on Future Genera -
tions, and the related institutional innovations 
proposed by the Our Common Agenda  report, 
can ensure that the new social contracts of this 
era, while enshrining a contemporary set of na -
tional and transnational values, do not become 
“dead hands of the past”69 that will constrain 
and obstruct future generations.
Similarly, the Global Digital Compact  can play 
a pivotal role in emphasizing and elaborating 
on the increasingly important digital dimension 
of the relationship between the state and those 
governed by it. Alongside a global digital divide, 
multiple divides exist within societies,70 and 
hence, the primary responsibility to close them 
falls upon national governments, especially if 
equal access to the Internet is in the process of 
emerging as a universal human right.71 Similarly, 
it is primarily incumbent upon national gov -
ernments to ensure the protection of those un -
der their jurisdiction from cyber attacks, cyber 
crime, and misinformation spread through on -
line channels—including, of course, through in -
ternational cooperation. Furthermore, in light 
of attempts in many countries to use digital 
technologies to restrict people’s rights and free -
doms, including to information,72 the Global 
Digital Compact can make a strong statement 
that the grounding of social contracts in human 
rights also applies to the digital sphere.
Lastly, the New Agenda for Peace  can help 
make new social contracts resilient against internal and external pressures that threaten 
the use of violence, a challenge which is partic -
ularly acute in fragile societies with a history of 
suppressing civic spaces. As underscored in the 
OCA report, revolutions, wars, and economic 
shocks put “the social contract under imme -
diate pressure, leaving a society vulnerable to 
disruption.”73 Complementary to actions asso -
ciated with the future New Agenda for Peace’s 
global dimension, addressing pressures on new 
social contracts depends on regional, nation -
al, and sub-national peacebuilding institutions 
and approaches, including steps to  identify and 
prevent emerging strategic risks that threaten 
to tear apart social contracts within and be -
tween communities worldwide.
Networked, Inclusive, and 
Effective Multilateralism
The Our Common Agenda  report calls for adapt -
ing the United Nations system so it can “play a 
leading role in a more networked and inclusive 
world, improving our collaboration and strate -
gic engagement with other actors and forums 
at the global and regional levels.”74 Already at 
the UN’s seventy-fifth anniversary in 2020, the 
Secretary-General had called for networked 
and inclusive multilateralism to address what 
he called “a surplus of multilateral challenges 
and a deficit of multilateral solutions.”75 The 
OCA report adds the adjective “effective” to 
“networked” and “inclusive”, a term later em -
phasized in the title of the Secretary-General’s 
High-Level Advisory Board on Effective 
Multilateralism (HLAB), which is to provide 
its report in early 2023.
The OCA report defines “networked” as harness -
ing existing capacities, breaking down traditional 
silos, and improving cooperation across different 
levels of governance.76 “Inclusive” is understood 
as providing a voice and better opportunities to 
stakeholders other than states, including inter -
governmental organizations, parliaments, mu -
nicipal and local administration, civil society and 
religious groups, universities, trade unions, and 
the business community sector.77 Seeing its em -
phasis on non-state actors, whose growing im -
portance and need for engagement has been long 
acknowledged,78 the term “multistakeholderism” 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 13
might also have been fitting.79 “Effective” is de -
fined as meaning the ability of the global gov -
ernance architecture to deliver on its promises 
and its readiness “to act or adapt in the face of 
present and new risks; prioritizes and resources 
the tasks that matter; delivers results; and can 
hold all actors, State and non-State, accountable 
for commitments made.”80 In anticipation of the 
HLAB’s recommendations early next year, it is 
already clear that the three global policy frame -
works, as elaborated below, can be important 
drivers for improved collective action based on 
the different parameters identified in the OCA 
report (figure 2.2).
The Declaration on Future Generations  could 
cater to important aspects of inclusivity such 
as creating a normative standard that demands 
giving voice to young people,  fostering a collec -
tive responsibility for future generations (the 
majority of whom will be born in the Global South), and putting multilateralism more 
strongly in the service of generations to come.81 
The declaration would represent a platform 
for fostering youth participation—and net -
working—in each of the relevant stakeholder 
groups identified in the report, ranging from 
governments to civil society organizations and 
the business community, rather than letting 
“youth” develop into its own new silo constit -
uency group. Harking back to the spirit of the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, mul -
tilateral cooperation, however successful in the 
here and now, will never be truly effective if it 
operates in a way that compromises the needs 
of future generations. Similarly, the declaration 
would thus play a key role in inspiring and back -
stopping national models and frameworks on 
future-oriented policy,  serving as the network 
generator, and bridging the narrative between 
the national and the global.  
Figure 2.2: Parameters for Networked–Inclusive–Effective Multilateralism
Source: Guterres, Our Common Agenda, 67. © 2021 United Nations. Reproduced with permission.Networked
MultilateralismEffective
Multilateralism
Inclusive
MultilateralismDraws on existing 
institutional capacities
Cross-pillar, avoids 
fragmentation
Coordination  
between regional  
and global levels
Flexible
Variable
Clear goals
Evidence drivenDelivers results
Prepared and 
ready to act
Resource  
priorities
Accountability for 
commitmentsSpaces for all voices
Diverse set of States  
Parliaments
International 
institutions, including 
international financial 
institutions
Civil society
Cities
Private sector
14
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY FutureGenIn addition, the Global Digital Compact , too, 
would cater to all three dimensions of the en -
hanced style of multilateralism for which the 
OCA report calls. Though arguably non-bind -
ing, this new framework could entrench a moral 
imperative by leveraging digital technologies 
to include and connect relevant stakeholders 
from around the world. Specifically, the com -
pact could build on large-scale consultations 
such as the UN75 Global Conversation that sur -
veyed more than 1.5 million people and spurred 
over 3,000 dialogues worldwide,82 as well as 
draw lessons for digital cooperation developed 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Similarly, it 
can elaborate on ways for employing digital 
technologies to help the UN adapt and better 
use its limited resources. NIEM is thus a core 
principle on which the Global Digital Compact 
is based, given that the success and effective -
ness of the endeavor is directly dependent on 
the extent to which key stakeholders are able 
to cooperate.  
Finally, concerning the New Agenda for 
Peace , the Secretary-General’s Our Common 
Agenda  notes how despite successes in mul -
tilateral cooperation in ensuring peace, tra -
ditional ways of preventing and resolving 
conflicts fail in “protracted conflicts involv -
ing transnational networks and new actors, 
frequently associated with terrorism, rapidly 
evolving weapons technologies and a grow -
ing willingness of regional actors to partici -
pate directly in wars.”83 The New Agenda for 
Peace  can help the UN deliver better on the 
core task and key public good of maintaining 
peace through more NIEM. The OCA report 
already suggests, among other things, a more 
inclusive approach to peacebuilding by plac -
ing “women and gender equality at the heart of peace and security.”84 It stresses the need 
for “a multistakeholder effort to reduce vi -
olence significantly worldwide and in all its 
forms … and girls, in line with target 16.1 of 
the Sustainable Development Goals.”85 Lastly, 
the multilateral system’s peace efforts can be 
made more effective through better foresight, 
prevention, and avoiding relapses into violent 
conflict—points that are elaborated in sec -
tion V of this report.
**
The Our Common Agenda  report contains a 
wealth of recommendations to take the UN 
and the wider multilateral system forward. 
Additional proposals have been developed in 
the independent policy research sphere, includ -
ing through past Stimson Center-Doha Forum 
collaborations such the reports Reimagining 
Governance in a Multipolar World  (2019), Coping 
with Old and New Crises  (2020), and Building 
Back Together and Greener  (2021)—each drawn 
upon in this section on conceptual innova -
tions.86 What characterizes the three global pol -
icy frameworks on which this report focuses is, 
as this section aimed to show, that each  of them 
can play a key role in operationalizing and de -
veloping the full potential of the OCA report’s 
three conceptual cornerstones: Bringing about 
a New Global Deal, inaugurating New Social 
Contracts, and heralding a new age of NIEM. 
Yet, work remains: firstly, to flesh  out  each of 
these global policy frameworks further; and 
secondly, to bring them to fruition through in -
tergovernmental and multistakeholder negotia -
tions as soon as possible. The following sections 
speak to both the substance and the strategy on 
the way forward for the Declaration on Future 
Generations, the Global Digital Compact, and 
the New Agenda for Peace.What characterizes the three global pol  icy 
frameworks is … that each of them can play a  
key role in operationalizing and de  veloping the 
full potential of the OCA report’s three concep -
tual cornerstones.
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 15
III. Representing Succeeding Generations 
through a Declaration on Future Generations
“The Peacemaker taught us about the Seven Generations. He said, when you sit in council for the 
welfare of the people, you must not think of yourself or of your family, not even of your generation. 
He said, make your decisions on behalf of the seven generations coming, so that they may enjoy what 
you have today.” — Oren Lyons (Seneca), Faithkeeper, Onondaga Nation87 
Global Policy Framework 
Proclaiming the well-being of future genera -
tions as a global public good, a Declaration on 
Future Generations should be crafted with con -
sideration of future generations’ legal rights, a 
country’s capacity for political mainstreaming, 
and the cross-cutting effects of the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. A repurposed 
Trusteeship Council or Stewardship Council, a 
Futures Lab, a universal periodic review mecha -
nism, an Intergenerational Sustainability Index, 
and a Special Envoy for Future Generations could 
all support the declaration’s implementation.
Challenges
Since 1997, the international system has ac -
knowledged the responsibilities of present gen -
erations toward those of the future.88 However, 
to date, efforts to put this potentially far-reach -
ing set of commitments into practice have 
been fragmented at best. The responsibility 
of legacy, we presently face as ancestors of the 
future, is to ensure that we do not irretriev -
ably foreclose possibilities for the well-being of 
those yet to be born, as well as an estimated  40 
percent of humanity now living  who will spend 
much of their lives in the world beyond 2050.89 
This leads to three major challenges fueled by 
knowledge and action gaps in the international 
community’s current attempts at long-term 
policymaking, namely: short-termism, high 
inequality, and unaccountability.
Short-termism in policymaking  
and the lack of political will
Much of political decision-making is reac -
tive to trending issue-spaces and windows of opportunity.90 This can be attributed to the 
bounds of 21st century perceptions of democra -
cy, wherein governments mostly seek to satisfy 
their current voter-base, rather than charting 
long-term action plans for the welfare of future 
generations.91 Especially under current political 
climates, where nationalism and populism are 
pushing back against supranational frameworks 
of globalization and pandemic recovery remains 
a priority for many, most governments find 
themselves working within conventional models 
of politics that privilege immediate gains in lieu 
of long-term strategies. 
Given this induced myopia, and with the lack 
of globally understood obligations to polities 
beyond one’s immediate voting pool, there is 
little political or social cost to omitting consid -
eration of future generations in policymaking, 
and where political will is present, it is often 
weak. Underfunding or lack of mainstreaming 
has caused many future-focused national strat -
egies to fizzle out over time.92 In fact, without 
a legal, political, or moral obligation set out in -
ternationally to hold states and governments 
accountable—and thereby induce gains and 
losses to political capital—the costs of evalu -
ating, let alone acting on, decisions made today 
on behalf of future citizenry too often outweigh 
any calculable current benefit. 
The multiplier effect of existing 
inequalities and the lack of collective 
global responsibility
The challenge of political will is more repug -
nant in the Global North, where the short-term 
interests of the vast majority of people are met, 
opening the opportunity to address long-term FutureGen
16
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY FutureGeninterests.  Politicians in high income countries 
are often unable to see beyond the next elec -
tion, and that is of particular concern, as they 
have the greatest resource potential to make 
decisions that would redound to the benefit of 
humanity in the future.
In addition to endemic resource shortages 
when contemplating longer-term policies, 
leaders in the Global South often face multi -
ple intersectional challenges, given the need 
to take different development pathways to 
accommodate global challenges compared to 
“developed” countries. These include  climate 
change, pre-existing demographic inequali -
ties, and the imbalanced governance of the 
global commons. Today, around 920 mil -
lion children live under severe water stress, 
forming the majority in the Global South. 
Worsening climate change will further add 
to their water woes with debilitating reper -
cussions for future generations, especially 
through causal links with regional conflicts 
as elaborated in section V.93 The COVID-19 
pandemic has further widened the socioeco -
nomic inequalities within and between coun -
tries. Currently, almost half of the world’s 
emerging-market and developing economies 
are falling behind in meeting the sustainable 
development goals.94 
With these multifaceted challenges to develop -
ment, countries often take up “bandage solu -
tions” that support their population’s near-
term needs, or immediate progress toward 
the SDGs, without necessarily thinking about 
the long-term sustainability of the policy or 
program itself. Moreover, several overlapping 
and ad hoc global treaties, declarations, and 
compacts to address these challenges have, in -
advertently, engendered an unclear framework 
in which to dedicate resources and balance ex -
isting priorities with foresight-driven policy. 
Consequently, any attempts made at repre -
senting future generations’ well-being in pol -
icy today tend to emanate from the Global 
North ( see discussion of national models be -
low). Nevertheless, many cross-cutting global 
challenges deeply affect groups in the Global 
South that are already vulnerable and facing 
socioeconomic inequalities, including women, indigenous populations, and ethnic and racial 
minorities. With the lack of a framework to in -
duce shared and collective global responsibil -
ities toward future generations’ cross-cutting 
needs (and one that skillfully employs today’s 
younger generations as a bridge to future gen -
erations), we see the horizontal inequalities of 
today created through gender, race, or ethnic -
ity become the vertical inequalities of tomor -
row, which impinge upon socioeconomic ca -
pabilities and opportunities for development.95 
This temporal multiplier effect is especially 
concerning given that the Global South will 
host the majority of future generations born 
by the end of the century.96 Collective glob -
al responsibility will require a clear concep -
tualization of future generations’ well-being 
and obligations toward them, the intentional 
championing of needs and future-oriented 
agendas from around the world, and the in -
troduction of new tools, training, and capaci -
ty-building opportunities.
Lack of Global Accountability
Despite intergenerational justice being a pop -
ular buzzword in global governance, espe -
cially in the context of managing the global 
commons which include the high seas, the 
atmosphere, Antarctica, and Outer Space, 
there currently is no institutional mechanism 
at the global level set to convene on matters 
regarding the protection of and utilization of 
the commons (as well as other major matters 
of intergenerational concern such as the glob -
al financial architecture), making it difficult 
to promote intergenerational justice on more 
than an unfocused, discursive level. 
Without such an institutional apparatus, civil 
society-driven accountability cannot be ap -
plied toward countries that have historically 
diminished the global commons through un -
sustainable production and consumption prac -
tices. Figure 3.1 lists the 20 countries with the 
greatest absolute negative effect on the global 
commons, often the largest countries by pop -
ulation or wealth. High-income countries con -
tinue to consume on a per capita basis at a rate 
60 percent higher than upper-middle-income 
countries, and 13 times the level of low-income 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 17
countries, while generating the largest share 
of international spillovers (figure 3.1).97 The 
five entities with the worst impacts are China, 
the United States, the EU27, Japan, and India. 
Eighteen of the 20 top contributors are part of 
the G20, who bear a special responsibility in 
safeguarding the global commons, as its mem -
ber countries’ represent around 80 percent of 
global GDP. 
The International Community’s 
Limited Response to Future 
Generations
The first global commitment to recognize 
responsibilities toward future generations 
came with UNESCO’s 1997 Declaration on the 
Responsibilities of the Present Generations to -
ward Future Generations.98 However, despite 
its breadth, it lacked effective accountability 
mechanisms or champions and failed to pro -
mulgate substantive rights for future genera -
tions, instead enumerating the notion of inter -
generational equity in a loose manner: more a presentation of behavioral guidelines than a 
serious framework for collective action. The 
UNESCO declaration remains insufficient as a 
tool for effectively mainstreaming future gen -
erations’ well-being into policies.99 
Cross-cutting initiatives, such as the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and the Paris Agreement, have pushed 
Member States to consider the idea of for -
ward-looking strategies. However, as box 3.1 
shows, international instruments developed 
under the traditional ad hoc, and often implicit 
approach to future-based policymaking, in the 
absence of an explicit and comprehensive guid -
ance framework, have left a number of serious 
knowledge and action gaps. 
Some Best Practices from  
National Models
Despite gaps in the international agenda, na -
tional and regional attempts at future gener -
ations frameworks have met varying degrees 
of success. Studying these initiatives may help 
one to configure a “bottoms-up approach” that Figure 3.1: Bottom twenty countries in the 2021 Global Commons Stewardship (GCS) Index
Units are in 
absolute terms, 
where 0-30 is 
categorized as 
“extreme”  
impact on the 
Commons, 30-50 
as “very high”  
impact, 50-70 as 
“high,”  70-80 
as “medium-
high,” 80-90 as 
“medium-low,” 
90-95 as “low,” 
and 95-100 as 
“none or very 
limited.” 
Source: Modified from Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) , Global Commons Stewardship Index 2021, 23. 
FutureGenCOUNTRY OVERALL DOMESTIC SPILLOVER
Iran 33.4 58.7
Turkey 36.1 47.8
Spain 44.0 37.6
Korea, Rep. 49.3 32.5
Italy 48.2 31.2
France 55.5 25.6
Mexico 29.6 47.1
Saudi Arabia 34.4 38.5
Canada 36.7 35.1
Australia 23.0 50.6
United Kingdom 48.7 23.0
Brazil 24.1 43.2
Indonesia 12.1 52.8
Germany 45.4 11.6
Russian Federation 16.3 26.3
India 4.4 30.6
Japan 46.2 1.3
European Union 9.1 1.0
United States 7.8 1.0
China 4.5 1.0
18
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY FutureGenBox 3.1: Gaps in the international community’s current response
INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS
 ɠThe Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment (1972)
 ɠUnited Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982)
 ɠReport of the World Commission on Environment and Development (1987)
 ɠThe Rio Declaration on Environment and Development and Agenda 21 (1992)
 ɠThe Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the World Conference on Human Rights (1993)
 ɠThe Convention on Biological Diversity (1993)
 ɠThe United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (1994)
 ɠThe Paris Climate Agreement (2015)
KNOWLEDGE GAPS
 ɠThe concept of intergenerational equity has been interpreted to place responsibility on the 
present generation rather than ensuring future generations’ rights.
 ɠLack of a coherent approach at the global level to protect the well-being of future generations.
 ɠLack of inclusion of the interests of the future generation in knowledge platforms.
 ɠInternational fora discussions are limited to the protection of the global climate, thereby failing 
to establish standards to prevent existential threats and preserve the global commons. 
 ɠUnderstanding future generations as a rights-based, political, and moral force.
ACTION GAPS
 ɠInsufficient nationally determined goals, apart from climate, that account for the interests of 
future generations. 
 ɠLack of long-term policy foresight.
 ɠFailure to establish structured parameters that could influence the actions of Member States, as 
well as international institutions.
 ɠFailure to formulate a rights-based approach that could shape substantive commitments and 
processes by powerful countries and global bodies. 
 ɠLack of institutional accountability (who owes the “duty of care.”) 
 ɠLack of significant representation of future generations’ interests.
Source:  Original Box, Stimson Center. 
It is worth noting that one cannot, definitionally, get a “member of the future generations group” to sit on, for example a panel, as is often done with 
women, youth, and other minority groups. While a proxy, such as an Envoy, could champion the interests of Future Generations, and Statespersons 
should consider future generations’ well-being in policymaking, this unique form of proxy representation means we must empathize with Future 
Generations, rather than tokenizing their representation in global governance, as is many times the case seen with minority groups. 
could further guide a comprehensive multilat -
eral governance framework. 
Some notable innovations at the national and 
regional levels provide initial sketches for a 
successful global approach. For example, the 
Parliament of Hungary established the Office 
of the Deputy-Commissioner for Fundamental 
Rights in 2011 and recognized the need to pro -
tect natural resources. The associated law stat -
ed that it shall be the obligation of the state to 
protect and maintain natural resources, and to preserve them for future generations.100 It stip -
ulates the idea of “common heritage of nation” 
in regards to natural resources, and it calls 
upon the state to protect, maintain, and pre -
serve natural resources for future generations. 
Moreover, domestic courts in several juris -
dictions, such as the Netherlands, have relied 
on existing supranational agreements (such 
as those in box 3.1) for interpreting national 
rights and obligations. The Dutch Supreme 
Court recently established the government’s 
duty of care on the basis of the European 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 19
Convention on Human Rights, in order to pro -
tect the rights to life and home from the threat 
of climate change.101
Alternatives to legal practice are seen in, for ex -
ample, the 2015 Well-Being of Future Generations 
(Wales) Act, wherein responsibilities were placed 
on specific public bodies to act in a manner to en -
sure that the needs of the present are met without 
compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs (a principle adapted 
from the 1987 Brundtland Commission).102 It lays 
down seven future well-being goals to guide the 
actions of the national, local, and public bodies. 
The Wales Act proposed the establishment of 
indicators against a particular outcome across 
several dimensions that could be expressed as a 
value or characteristic measured quantitatively 
or qualitatively (figure 3.2). Importantly, a peri -
odic “Future Trends Report” increased the trans -
parency and accountability of public bodies. The 
Act went a step further by defining five criteria, 
(Long-Term,  Prevention, Integration, Collabora -
tion, and Involvement) through which to measure 
the extent and scope of intergenerational sustain -
able development. And it provided a window of 
opportunity to apply a Disaster Risk Reduction 
approach with an emphasis on prevention.103  Wales’ “all-in” approach can be contrasted with 
Barbados’ methodology, in its FutureBarbados 
initiative of choosing champions to work with the 
government as entry points to carry forward advo -
cacy for the mainstreaming of future generations’ 
interests and equities.104
Outside the realm of law- and politics-focused 
methods lies Japan’s Future Design movement, 
a localized foresight approach that exemplifies 
the Inclusive Imaginaries methodology being 
piloted by UNDP’s Strategic Foresight initia -
tive.105 Established with the mission of strength -
ening intergenerational justice, the participa -
tory decision-making model advanced in Japan 
employs behavioral sciences to design social 
systems that enable residents at the local level 
to discuss and decide on long-term plans by 
simulating negotiations between stakeholders 
of the future and those of the present.106 This 
builds on ideas from indigenious philosophies 
of “intergenerational facing” and building in -
tertemporal relationships.107
At the same time, no system is universally ap -
plicable. Continued scenario planning, articula -
tion of small wins to stakeholders, clear targets 
and metrics to measure implementation, trans -
parency and accountability through consistent 
Figure 3.2: Welsh National Well-Being Indicators Framework
Source: Welsh Government, “Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015,” 2015. 
vibrant 
culture
cohesive 
communitieshealthier
more  
equalresilientprosperous globally  
responsible1
2
3
46
57FutureGen
20
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY FutureGenreporting, and due consideration of how eco -
nomic models interact with the social fabric of 
a society, country, and region will best promote 
a policy framework’s success. 
Major Elements of the Global 
Policy Framework
Despite challenges, the world’s capacity for long-
term planning is greater than ever. Advanced 
modeling systems enable us to anticipate the 
consequences of our actions many years into 
the future (the life-cycle of these technologies 
is further discussed in section IV).
The Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda  
report acknowledges this and recommends tak -
ing action on protecting the equities of future 
generations. While the idea is featured through -
out the report, from new social contracts to a 
new global deal and better emergency response 
mechanisms, specific proposals include a Dec -
laration on Future Generations, establishing 
a Futures Lab, repurposing the Trusteeship 
Council for deliberations on future generations, 
and appointing a Special Envoy for Future Gen -
erations. What the OCA lacks, however, is an 
in-depth consideration of these ideas, as well 
as a conceptual understanding of the notion of 
doing right by future generations.108 Metaphor -
ically, while the goals exist, and the principle of 
“scoring goals is good” is agreed upon, the strat -
egy of how to play and even the reason why we 
should play the game is yet to be agreed upon.
Conceptualizing Future Generations’  
Well-Being as a Global Public Good
Let us start by thinking of why we should play 
the game. A global public good is understood 
to meet two characteristics: non-rivalry in con -
sumption and non-excludability. Their benefits 
are quasi universal in terms of countries, people and generations—for example, meeting the 
needs of current generations without foreclosing 
development options for future generations.109 In 
other words, the well-being of future generations 
should be considered as a global public good, 
catering to the similar ideals of global health, 
peace, and a healthy planet (as envisaged in Our 
Common Agenda ).110 From a moral perspective, 
this poses a duty of guardianship toward the 
management of this global public good, and by 
recognizing the well-being of our successors as 
a good for us today, we bring forth the notion of 
legacy and set normative standards for the type 
of ancestors we seek to become.111
Having elucidated the framing of the moral di -
mension, the following operational elements 
consider the “asset management” of this global 
public good through legal and political prisms, 
the importance of establishing institutional 
support systems to overcome these challenges, 
and the need to learn from past lessons. 
A Declaration on Future Generations
Legal Rights of and Obligations toward 
Future Generations
Providing legal recognition to the well-being 
of future generations requires a direct link be -
tween the effect of the actions or operations of 
an entity and the needs and interests of future 
generations. In other words, a “duty of care” 
must be made explicit to which Member States 
can be held accountable. Such a notion of “duty 
of care” could be established on the premise of 
intergenerational equity, which has been recog -
nized under numerous domestic jurisdictions. 
In the case of Future Generations v. Ministry of 
the Environment and Others , the Supreme Court 
of Colombia applied the principle of intergener -
ational equity to “future generations, including 
the children who brought this action,” and it Within the bounds of what we have come to 
understand as “sustainable” politics, the future 
lies at the crux of political intent and realignment 
of our moral and social constructs.
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 21
ordered the government to formulate an inter -
generational pact for the life of the Colombian 
Amazon with the active participation of the 
youth plaintiffs.112
Globally, the connection between human 
well-being, our natural environment, and hu -
man rights was made ever clearer in the re -
cent, historic UN General Assembly resolution 
carried by 161 Member States that declared 
access to a clean and healthy environment to 
be a universal human right.113 Importantly, by 
connecting human rights to an issue which 
would outlast current populations—the envi -
ronment—the resolution introduces an inter -
temporal sense of duty to human rights which 
extends across generations. In this extension 
of our societal relations and obligations beyond 
those presently living, we find ourselves obliged 
to protect the ability of future generations to 
avail their universal human right as well. Thus, 
within the context of global environmental 
regulation, people and their governments can 
mark the emergence of a collective global legal 
obligation toward intergenerational equity and 
the well-being of future generations.
A Declaration on Future Generations should 
prescribe a standard of care that could lay the 
foundation for accountability and transparen -
cy measures focused on recognizing existing 
intergenerational rights, but equally extending 
the rights of future generations beyond the en -
vironment and the global commons to consider 
a wider set of existential threats. And in doing 
so, it could lay the foundation for potential na -
tional legislation. Even if establishing concrete 
rights (instead of simply needs and interests) 
of future generations proves to be politically 
infeasible, on the basis of established “stan -
dards of care”, precise interests could be left 
for the young and future generations to decide 
upon themselves, interpreting the legal inter -
ests of future generations as a living concept. 
The new declaration must move past the 1997 
UNESCO declaration, laying down substantive 
provisions and incentivizing states to follow 
their obligations, in order to better protect and 
promote the interests, and ensure the rights, of 
future generations. Realigning Political Incentives  
in Support of Future Citizens 
Within the bounds of what we have come to 
understand as “sustainable” politics, “the fu -
ture” lies at the crux of political intent and re -
alignment of our moral and social constructs.114 
Realizing the well-being of future generations 
as a global public good through a declaration 
would require a framework that is not blind to 
the mechanisms that power political will. 
Realigning priorities and renewing intergen -
erational solidarity could be done through ex -
isting institutional mechanisms. For example, 
just as every UN resolution undergoes a bud -
getary implications analysis, the UN should 
include in its review of resolutions their im -
pact on future generations. Any resolution that 
would, in effect, be harmful to future gener -
ations could be either modified or made time 
bound (or both). Equally, one may employ hori-
zon scanning techniques to establish signals, 
based on trends and patterns, that connect the 
well-being of today’s generations with those of 
the future.115 Going beyond trend predictions 
of what current activities mean for future 
generations, one would consider how varia -
tions in, for example, the stability of funding 
in education systems today would affect the 
development capabilities of future generations, 
thus connecting and comparing policy effects 
today to the outcomes of the future. Such in -
novative approaches should be complemented 
by early warning systems, climate and global 
commons “roadmaps,” and robust forecasting 
mechanisms to enable decision-makers to se -
quence policies and take timely action to com -
bat existing and future challenges. 
The Futures Lab proposed in Our Common 
Agenda  would provide a strong backstop to the 
declaration by promoting an exchange of best 
practices, narrowing knowledge gaps, and pro -
viding capacity-building services to countries 
and institutions globally to mitigate against 
the multiplier effect of inequities.116 Facilitated 
by a Special Envoy for Future Generations (see 
below) in partnership with a wide range of gov -
ernmental, civil society, and private sector en -
tities, the lab would operate on the indigenous 
principle of seventh generational thinking , which FutureGen
22
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY FutureGeninvolves making governance decisions based 
on the most strategic ways to secure the health 
of the planet for seven generations into the fu -
ture. This would increase capacity to deal with 
anticipated challenges and help to ensure that 
approaches to risk mitigation and prevention 
do not fall prey to short-termism.117 Indigenous 
logic is being brought to the forefront across 
the UN system as a foundational guide for 
decision-making.
The proposed Futures Lab may further sup -
port the operationalization of the Declaration 
on Future Generations by aiding UN Member 
States in the creation of entities and depart -
ments within multilateral forums, academic 
institutions, and national governments that 
are dedicated to forward-thinking legal, eco -
nomic, and environmental evolution. Oxford 
University already has excelled in this regard 
with its prolific Human Rights for Future 
Generations (HRFG) research program fund -
ed by the Oxford Martin School. The program 
contributes to academic and policy thinking 
on the human rights aspects of politics, cli -
mate change, and conflict-based scenarios in 
the 21st century—but with broad ramifications 
for the future. Another good example is that 
of Barbados, which has emerged as one of the 
most advanced green economies in the Latin 
American and Caribbean region. Employing a 
step-by-step approach toward a just transition, 
Barbados has demonstrated a strong sense of 
commitment to achieving a sustainable and 
secure future for its generations to come.118 
Singapore has also spearheaded foresight-based policymaking since the 1990s; its Center for 
Strategic Futures has been working on capaci -
ty-building and strategic adaptation, keeping in 
mind future trends and their impacts.119
Youth, Agenda 2030, and Beyond
The Sustainable Development Goals would 
transpose across any comprehensive declara -
tion on the well-being of future generations, as 
well as across other aspects of Our Common 
Agenda . These include, but by no means are lim -
ited to, preserving the planet, the importance 
of creating a new agenda for peace (discussed 
in section V), the necessity for digital inclusion 
and reclaiming the digital commons (elaborat -
ed in section IV), the importance of addressing 
growing inequalities, and renewing the social 
contract anchored in human rights. 
When concerning youth and intergenerational 
equity, the SDGs lay the foundation for thriv -
ing youth populations today and determine 
the opportunities they face as they grow into 
the adults of tomorrow. Such responsibilities 
toward young people must be inherent in a 
Declaration on Future Generations, as each 
generation must confront the challenges and 
opportunities of youth (figure 3.3). The im -
portance of considering youth in, and with, a 
Declaration on Future Generations is, thus, one 
of setting up the right foundations for a thriving 
future citizenry. As such, young people play an 
important transitive role in the process of in -
tergenerational equity and justice as both the 
introduction of future generations into soci -
eties, but also the guardians of responsibility 
Figure 3.3: Illustration of dynamic interactions across generations
Source:  Original Graphic, Stimson Center.FUTURE  
GENERATIONSYOUTH  
OF TODAYOLDER 
GENERATIONS  
OF TODAYBecome
Responsible toBecome
Responsible to
Responsible to
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 23
Conceptualizing and operationalizing the well-
being of future generations as a global public 
good through a new declaration develops an 
overarching framework to consider global 
agendas, such as the SDGs, through a lens that 
holds Member States and other stakeholders 
accountable to 2030 and beyond.FutureGentoward the generations that will succeed them 
as they grow older. 
Conceptualizing and operationalizing the 
well-being of future generations as a global 
public good through a new declaration develops 
an overarching framework to consider global 
agendas, such as the SDGs, through a lens that 
holds Member States and other stakeholders 
accountable to 2030 and beyond. For all its ad -
vances over previous international development 
efforts, Agenda 2030 did not sufficiently center 
the well-being of future generations. Certainly, 
by proxy it does so—achieving the 17 SDGs 
would, necessarily, redound to the benefit of 
future generations—but the lens and approach 
it takes must be transposed with an overarching 
future generations perspective.
A Council for Future Generations,  
A Future Generations Review, and  
an Intergenerational Solidarity Index
Enhancing intergenerational equity across the 
UN system will require deep engagement and 
cooperation by all Member States, which can 
be facilitated by repurposing the Trusteeship 
Council into a Council for Future Generations 
and appointing a Special Envoy for Future 
Generations (see below), as proposed in the 
OCA.120 The Council for Future Generations 
would serve as an oversight body of the decla -
ration, composed of both Member States and 
other stakeholders, in line with the Secretary-
General’s call for more inclusive and networked 
multilateralism. The council could facilitate 
collaboration among these state and non-state actors on effective strategies to infuse the prin -
ciples outlined in the Declaration on Future 
Generations into intergenerational policy 
implementation.121
The Council for Future Generations could also 
provide a space for Member States to deliber -
ate upon the governance of the global commons, 
whose protection and preservation are imper -
ative to ensuring the well-being of future gen -
erations. Sustainable governance of the global 
commons advances intergenerational equity, and 
with the overarching concept of the well-being 
of future generations as a global public good—as 
understood through the declaration—humanity 
can close the gaps in policy agendas that current -
ly manage different facets of the global commons 
in distinct (and disconnected) silos.  
Keeping in mind the potential inertia of UN 
Charter reform (which would be required 
for a repurposed Trusteeship Council), an 
alternative proxy to the Council for Future 
Generations could be a separate, specialized 
Stewardship Council, which would also aim to 
transcend the traditional state-centric frame -
work. Such a multistakeholder forum is needed 
to tackle the challenges of short-termism, reac -
tive policymaking, and the intersectionality of 
global challenges, as manifested in the diverse 
development pathways that developing coun -
tries must pursue to address climate change 
and governance of the global commons. A mul -
tistakeholder approach can propagate greater 
results in bringing the declaration to life, for 
it enables cross-sector engagement which will 
24
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY FutureGenallow for a multitude of perspectives and ex -
pertise to be harnessed within civil society, the 
business community, and governments.
To ensure that Member States are held account -
able to the declaration, either the proposed 
Council for Future Generations or Stewardship 
Council could carry out a Future Generations 
Review (FGR), modeled on the Human Rights 
Council’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR), de -
signed to acknowledge the collective responsi -
bility of present generations toward the rights 
of future generations. A Future Generations 
Review will serve as an accountability mech -
anism vis-a-vis Member States, as well as in -
crease the transparency of countries’ com -
mitments in adhering to the rights of future 
generations, thereby ensuring that policymak -
ers operate under the principle of a “duty of 
care.” The FGR could be renewed on a cyclical 
basis, so that Member States are encouraged to 
increase their ambitions, over time, in imple -
menting long-term intergenerational strategies 
that reflect best practices worldwide.
The development of an Intergenerational 
Solidarity Index (ISI), as part of the FGR, could 
further showcase the degree to which Member 
States are actively working to provide for fu -
ture generations, demonstrating how different 
countries are performing in relation to one an -
other to reach specific shared targets. Besides 
creating a sociopolitical cost to myopic poli -
cymaking, an ISI could provide a baseline by 
which all countries are assessed, employing the 
Sustainable Development Goals’ agreed indica -
tors as the metrics by which intergenerational 
solidarity is measured. This could help to fur -
ther universalize the SDGs so that their imple -
mentation extends beyond the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development, making it more 
inclusive of future generations.
Alternatively, the FGR and the ISI should be 
contextualized country-by-country, in order to 
fully understand the state-specific factors that 
either inhibit or enable countries from meeting 
specific targets. In this model, states would sub -
mit their nationally determined contributions 
(NDCs) through Voluntary National Reviews 
(VNRs) to report their efforts in increasing in -
tergenerational solidarity, similar to how the Paris Agreement operates. This is especially 
important for states that face intersectional 
challenges in providing for future generations, 
as such an approach could provide clarity on 
how to best assist them in capacity-building 
strategies for addressing present needs, while 
simultaneously preparing for the future.
Current models of intergenerational indexes 
have been designed to measure the level of in -
tergenerational solidarity within  nation-states, 
since some countries have developed high lev -
els of intergenerational solidarity through the 
procurement of sovereign wealth funds, which, 
in many cases, have been funded through fos -
sil fuels extraction, thus creating wealth for 
states at the expense of degrading the plan -
et.122 Systematic multilateral efforts to enact 
international intergenerational solidarity have 
ceased to exist, but the proposed development 
of the FGR and ISI for driving multistakehold -
er engagement on the Declaration on Future 
Generations would be a step toward making 
such solidarity a global reality.
A Special Envoy for Future Generations
A new office of a Special Envoy for Future 
Generations, reporting directly to the 
Secretary-General at the level of a UN Under-
Secretary-General, could give a voice to future 
generations within the highest echelon of the 
UN Secretariat, representing their rights and 
championing the perspectives of those speak -
ing up for intergenerational equity. 
The Special Envoy would be appointed by the 
Secretary-General to a five-year term of of -
fice—with the possibility of renewal—equipped 
with sufficient support staff to enable them to 
work in collaboration with all UN entities in 
future-forward decision-making, the implemen -
tation of agreed policies, and the collection of 
evolving best practices. The Special Envoy’s of -
fice would further staff the Council for Future 
Generations or Stewardship Council. This mu -
tually reinforcing relationship could strength -
en representation of future generations, as the 
Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights does vis-a-vis the UN Human Rights 
Council for its issues and objectives within and 
beyond the UN system.123 The Special Envoy for 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 25
Future Generations should also work closely 
with the UN’s Youth Envoy in shaping future 
agendas, thereby increasing intergeneration -
al solidarity and enhancing efforts toward the 
creation of new social contracts (see section II 
of this report). 
Given that countries in the Global South 
bear the greatest social inequality, econom -
ic instability, and climate vulnerability and 
will host the majority of people from future 
generations, the Special Envoy should strive, 
in particular, to champion the developing 
countries voices, alongside those of minority 
groups worldwide who are equally vulnerable 
to cross-cutting challenges.
Output from the Futures Lab would further em -
power the Special Envoy’s ability to bring a direct, 
future-forward influence to policymaking across 
the UN system. More than just embodying the 
Declaration on Future Generations, the Special 
Envoy could work to make long-term perspec -
tives the crux of UN decision-making, guided 
by research and innovations proposed by the 
Futures Lab, which could supercharge Agenda 
2030 and make the UN more effective as a whole.   
Overcoming Potential Spoilers 
and other Bottlenecks 
Member States should seek to present and sign 
a Declaration on Future Generations as an inte -
gral part of (or closely in connection with) the 
Pact for the Future at the Summit of the Future 
(see section VI). To this end, the President 
of the General Assembly has appointed the 
Permanent Representatives of the Netherlands 
and Fiji to co-facilitate intergovernmental nego -
tiations, first on an elements paper followed by 
the declaration itself (see annex 1.1 for related 
procedural summaries). While there is general support for a declaration, 
concerns raised by Member States have includ -
ed the stark differences foreseen in the well-be -
ing and overall prospects of future generation 
across different countries worldwide; the need 
to focus on and prioritize existing frame -
works such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, the Addis Ababa Financing for 
Development Action Agenda, and the Paris 
Climate Agreement; competing perspectives 
on repurposing the Trusteeship Council; and 
the limited amount of time to negotiate an am -
bitious and effective declaration. 
Some of these concerns were addressed above, 
but overcoming other anticipated challeng -
es will require leadership by Member States 
that already demonstrate a national commit -
ment to future generation policies and invest -
ments, including those active in the Network 
of Institutions for Future Generations.124 
Additionally, the Secretary-General should 
encourage, for an upcoming cycle of ECOSOC 
Commissions and other gatherings, that the 
theme of the cycle emphasize future genera -
tions, in order to build a body of knowledge and 
understanding, including by encouraging UN 
research bodies to focus on future generations.125 
If future generations must rely on proxies as 
their only means of representation today, then 
these proxies will have to overcome at least 
some of the current gaps in their effective 
representation, by way of strong frameworks, 
concrete operational mechanisms, and even 
stronger commitments from governments, the 
business community, and civil society. An ef -
fective, deliberate, and courageous Declaration 
on Future Generations will enable present gen -
erations to serve not only as empathetic proxy 
representatives, but as ancestors with a legacy 
for which they should be proud. FutureGenIf future generations must rely on proxies as their 
only means of representation today, then these 
proxies will have to overcome at least some of the 
current gaps in their effective representation.
26
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY GDCIV. Facilitating an Open, Free, and Secure 
Digital Future for all through a Global  
Digital Compact 
“The most important thing is to make the technology inclusive — make the world change. Next, pay 
attention to those people who are 30 years old, because those are the internet generation. They will 
change the world; they are the builders of the world.” — Jack Ma, Founder and Executive Chairman, 
Alibaba Group126
Global Policy Framework
Rapid advancements in technology pose ever in -
creasing risks to the protection of human rights, 
even as they create opportunities for develop -
ment. The absence of a holistic, networked, and 
multilateral approach to technological gover -
nance necessitates the need for a Global Digital 
Compact based on a framework that addresses 
three key dimensions of the technological life -
cycle, namely innovation, infrastructure, and 
information (the “3-I’s”).
Challenges
The dynamic nature of technology creates 
new frontiers for progress but also poses novel 
challenges. At no other time have the impacts 
of technology been as rapid, widespread, and 
acutely interwoven with every aspect of human 
life. As a result, there is an urgent and pressing 
need for the development of a Global Digital 
Compact outlining “shared principles for an 
open, free and secure future for all,” re-affirm -
ing human rights in an age where the lines be -
tween the “human” and the “digital” are be -
coming increasingly blurred.127
Currently, intergovernmental and UN-led ef -
forts toward digital and technological gover -
nance remain piecemeal and fragmented at best. 
The Secretary-General’s Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation, despite its scope and breadth, 
fails to address all elements of technology or 
the need to create a set of global principles 
agreed upon by the international community.128 
Consequently, a better way to frame global risks posed by technology, both present and in the fu -
ture, would be to envision them across a “3-I’s” 
framework centered around the key facets of 
technology—namely, its innovation and devel -
opment, its accessibility through infrastructure, 
and its use of information.
The innovation  of technology refers to its stage 
of ideation, materials sourcing, development, 
production, and deployment, and is fraught 
with increasing challenges to human rights. 
Algorithmic bias, for example, even when un -
intentional, can serve to reinforce historical 
discrimination.129 Wrongful arrests have oc -
curred in the U.S. due to mistakes in facial 
recognition software, while the UN notes the 
reinforcement of gender biases through the 
use of “submissive” female voices in virtual as -
sistants.130 Exploitative working conditions in 
the sourcing of materials, such as cobalt, have 
fueled the rise of violence in parts of Central 
Africa, while forced and bonded labor in mate -
rials sourcing promotes inequality, such as the 
forced labors of the Uighur minority in China, 
which were linked in 2020 to resource produc -
tion for such corporations as Apple, Microsoft, 
and Samsung.131 Operating primarily unchecked 
and unregulated at the international and trans -
national level, the private sector has little moti -
vation to adhere to human rights standards, and 
may unwittingly contribute to further abuse. 
The second key dimension of technology— in-
frastructure —refers to the matter of its distri -
bution, access, and connectivity. Regarding the 
latter, approximately 1.4 billion individuals are 
estimated to be living in Internet poverty today, 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 27
with roughly half of the world’s population still 
lacking any Internet access.132 The COVID-19 
pandemic further exacerbated the digital divide, 
particularly for low-income countries, of which 
only 25 percent have the necessary platforms 
for remote learning and work, which hurts their 
ability to harness educational, civic, and eco -
nomic opportunities.133 A standardized set of 
global principles concerning digital infrastruc -
ture governance is sorely needed to protect the 
integrity of the Internet and digital commons as 
a public good, which is currently being jeopar -
dized by legislation at national levels intending 
to repeal net neutrality laws.134 
The final key dimension of technology is the 
quality and use of information , i.e., how indi -
viduals use technological products and its ef -
fect on human rights online. Dis- and misin -
formation have emerged as key global threats 
to the international rules-based and normative 
order, particularly during the COVID-19 pan -
demic, with the World Economic Forum, the 
EU, and the UN naming misinformation as a 
“primary threat to humanity.”135 Disinformation 
was pivotal in determining the outcome of the 
Brexit campaign, as was Facebook’s role in the Rohingya genocide, while misinformation con -
tributes to the development of echo chambers, 
which may lead to group polarization and dem -
ocratic degradation.136 Issues of Internet shut -
downs and censorship, mass surveillance by 
both governments and the private sector, and 
noncompliance with the principles of net neu -
trality further undermine human rights online. 
Cyberbullying and cybercrime pose additional 
risks to human rights, particularly among youth, 
of whom seven in ten have experienced online 
abuse at some point.137 
The response to these global issues, thus far, 
lacks a truly networked and multilateral ap -
proach, with efforts to address these challenges 
being fragmented and siloed across different 
UN departments, national governments, and 
among various private sector and civil society 
stakeholders. Furthermore, given the high rate 
of global change in technology, there is a consid -
erable pacing problem with the UN’s response 
to technological developments. An overarch -
ing structure within the UN system is sorely 
needed to effectively coordinate varying stake -
holders, while providing common baselines to 
which technological development can be held 
Source:  World Economic Forum, Unlocking Technology for the Global Goals, 2020.Figure 4.1: The relationship between technology and the SDGsGDC

28
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY GDCglobally accountable, based on a “3-I’s” frame -
work. The proposed Global Digital Compact 
can, therefore, serve to simultaneously rein -
force and reaffirm existing digital goals (such as 
the Sustainable Development Goals, see figure 
4.1), while providing a normative, overarching, 
and holistic framework to support the Secretary 
General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation. In 
so doing, the GDC can chart a united vision for 
technology and its impact on human rights go -
ing forward. 
The International Community’s 
Limited Response to  
Digital Governance
Global principles on technology abound at the 
national, regional, and international levels, rec -
ommended from governmental, private sector, 
civil society, and multistakeholder perspectives. 
This section of the chapter offers an overview of 
current responses to the challenges listed above, 
noting that despite the proliferation of gover -
nance mechanisms (see table 4.1), there is no 
one entity which sets,  coordinates, or monitors 
implementation of global standards for digital 
technology, especially as regards the impact of 
such technology on the non-discriminatory en -
joyment of basic human rights. 
Principles and mechanisms that do exist are 
inherently unenforceable due to national sover -
eignty (with most—particularly governmental 
ones—being contradictory), and they lack effec -
tive incentives to ensure multistakeholder ad -
herence.138 For instance, in the field of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), the U.S. intends to focus on 
establishing voluntary guidelines, while pro -
moting ethical research and use of technolo -
gy.139 Conversely, the European Union’s pro -
posed Artificial Intelligence Act suggests the 
development of mandatory AI rules intended to 
safeguard and protect civil rights and individual 
privacy.140 The UK, in comparison, has adopted 
an innovation-first policy approach to AI regu -
lation, leaving the regulation of this technology 
to its existing regulators, leading to a relatively 
fragmented national approach.141 “Safe harbor” 
provisions in the U.S. for social media content 
in trade agreements make it difficult to regulate 
content internationally.142 Conversely, China’s “great firewall,” with its emphasis on full data 
localization, allows for effective action and a na -
tional response in fighting emergencies like the 
COVID-19 pandemic, but can simultaneously be 
used more controversially to isolate its citizens 
from the global net.143 These varying national 
approaches to digital governance highlight the 
obstacles in coordinating a global response to 
addressing the challenges outlined above. 
At the regional level, multiple initiatives seek to 
secure a free and fair digital future. For instance, 
the EU General Data Regulation Protection and 
Digital Services Act seeks to create a more in -
clusive governance mechanism on the modera -
tion of social media.  Civil society and the pri -
vate sector were key participants in this process, 
creating initiatives such as the Global Internet 
Forum to Counter Terrorism, which continues 
to include members such as Zoom, Amazon 
and AirBnB. Furthermore, various efforts have 
been undertaken, such as the Digital ASEAN 
initiative by the World Economic Forum, the 
Arab Regional initiatives introduced by the 
World Telecommunications Development 
Conferences, and the Central Asia Regional 
Economic Program Digital Strategy 2030, to 
create greater cooperation amongst nations on 
digital issues and benefit the digital economy.144 
Nevertheless, a key theme among most of these 
regional efforts are the western-centricity of 
their outputs, the aspirational and unenforce -
able nature of their content (due to the absence 
of an overarching compulsory juridical system), 
and a skew toward focusing on increased digital 
accessibility to the detriment of other techno -
logical factors, such as the protection of human 
rights online.145 
While a patchwork of international institu -
tions dedicated to technology exists, such as 
the International Telecommunication Union 
and the Internet Governance Forum, there is 
no single UN framework or institution which 
collectively covers and spans innovation, infra -
structure, and information, leading to piece -
meal and fragmented initiatives across na -
tional, regional, and international levels (see 
table 4 .1).146 Different UN entities, including 
the Security Council (which discussed threats 
posed to security through technology on May
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 29
Table 4.1: Responses from the international community to technological challenges 
TECHNOLOGICAL 
STAGENATIONAL RESPONSEREGIONAL 
RESPONSE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE 
InnovationKorea Digital 
Development 
Program147Beijing AI Principles148The Charlevoix Common Vision 
for the Future of Artificial 
Intelligence149
Infrastructure WBG Digital Gambia 
Project150WBG Digital Economy 
for Africa (DE4A)151Global Governance on the 
Stability of Cyberspace152
InformationCritical  Infrastructure 
Threat Information 
Sharing Framework153The Digital Services 
Act154Sao Paulo NetMundial 
Declaration155
Source: Original Table, Stimson Center. 
23, 2022), offer fragmented inputs to technology 
governance—and how to best respond to the 
challenges and risks it poses—thereby facili -
tating the need for a whole-of-system approach 
within the UN to address these risks.
The  UN Secretary-General’s convening of a 
High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation be -
ginning in July 2018, followed by his compre -
hensive Roadmap for Digital Cooperation in 
2020, provided two important steps forward, 
by offering, for instance, useful and timely rec -
ommendations on achieving universal connec -
tivity by 2030, promoting digital public goods, 
and ensuring digital inclusion (please see sec -
tion VI for a full exploration of the current 
state-of-play toward a proposed Global Digital 
Compact). However, these earlier processes 
were not convened in an intergovernmental 
format. As these initiatives represent outputs 
of the Office of the Secretary-General, they 
are, thus far, lacking in true multilateral own -
ership.156 Accordingly, there is also little onus 
on non-governmental stakeholders, such as the 
private sector or civil society groups, to partici -
pate, much less hold themselves accountable to 
these recommendations.
Major Elements of the Global 
Policy Framework 
In the OCA report, the Secretary-General 
proposed the development of a Global Digital 
Compact “outlining shared principles for an 
open, free and secure digital future for all.”157 Given the considerable diversity of approaches 
to the governance of technology outlined above, 
and the ever-increasing challenges to peace, se -
curity, and development posed by technology, 
the time is ripe for the creation of a compact 
aligning the UN, governments, the private sec -
tor, and civil society under shared global prin -
ciples for “complex digital issues”—including 
avoiding fragmentation of the Internet, ap -
plying human rights online, and introducing 
accountability criteria for discrimination and 
misleading content. 
Intended to be unveiled during the Summit 
of the Future, preparations for the GDC have 
included broad thematic consultations orga -
nized by the President of the General Assembly 
on this topic, in early 2022, with the Office 
of the Secretary General’s Special Envoy on 
Technology convening a multistakeholder tech -
nology track to discuss inputs. Figure 4.2 below 
outlines a general consensus among Member 
States, thus far, on key potential themes of the 
GDC, as outlined in the Our Common Agenda  
report, with improving Internet connectivity 
and ensuring the application of human rights 
online as key front-runners.158 While the Y-axis 
represents the number of states broadly sup -
porting the six themes, it is important to note 
that the figure reflects a general trend toward 
certain themes, rather than a clear consensus 
on each topic.
Whereas the Secretary General’s Roadmap 
for Digital Cooperation provides a “technical GDC
30
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY GDCbackbone” for the Global Digital Compact, so 
to speak, this innovative set of ideas also offers 
a unique opportunity, going forward, for the 
UN to align its fragmented work on technol -
ogy and promote a common vision for tech -
nological governance and development.159 The 
GDC can serve as the basis for developing core 
ideals of digital governance, reaffirming and 
reinforcing the UN’s three pillars of human 
rights, peace and security, and development, 
while “turbo-charging” the implementation 
of the 2030 Agenda.160 
Given the current proliferation of principles 
and mechanisms to govern technology and its 
impact, the GDC should not create a set of new 
principles and mechanisms, but rather address 
the glaring absence of an international entity 
able to amalgamate the existing networks and 
architectures of global technological norms un -
der one overarching superstructure. Doing so 
would resolve redundancies stemming from the 
duplication of efforts, while strengthening ex -
isting principles. Simultaneously, it would serve 
to strengthen the legitimacy of these norms, 
based, in part, on the support it receives from 
the United Nations.
The Global Digital Compact can, thus, be con -
sidered an overarching vision of technological 
governance, seeking to strengthen existing 
frameworks and principles, while creating new avenues for multiple stakeholders to interact in 
a forum where they can benefit from increased 
information exchange. Consequently, the GDC 
should be cross-cutting and holistic in its ap -
proach. Specifically, it should echo how the 
Roadmap for Digital Cooperation has addressed 
a variety of issues by identifying clear roles for 
each stakeholder type, while, simultaneously, 
creating a unique space whereby all related 
stakeholders can facilitate cooperation, and 
create lasting synergies and partnerships.161 By 
serving as a robust and dynamic platform where 
concerned stakeholders—such as governments, 
the private sector, and civil society—can come 
together to exchange knowledge, information, 
and best practices in their respective sectors, 
the compact could provide coordination among 
major stakeholders and reduce policy inflation 
(i.e a proliferation of potentially overlapping 
policy initiatives on digital governance) by pro -
moting greater discussion.162 
The GDC should reaffirm and emphasize the 
implementation of the Sustainable Development 
Goals. This sentiment was broadly reflect -
ed by Member States in the President of the 
General Assembly’s thematic consultations 
on Our Common Agenda , as noted in annex 
1.2. For instance, in a Joint Statement by a di -
verse group of countries, it was noted that the 
Global Digital Compact should “leverage digital Figure 4.2: Member States’ general consensus on possible Global Digital Compact themes
Source:  Original Figure, Stimson Center, based on data gathered from the President of the General Assembly’s Our Common Agenda  
Thematic Consultations. Connecting 
PeopleInternet  
FragmentationProtect  
DataHuman Rights  
OnlineRegulation  
of AIDigital  
Commons15
10
5
0
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 31
transformation to improve lives, empower peo -
ple, and advance the SDGs”—a view echoed by 
Estonia, which noted that “affordable, meaning -
ful connectivity and digital inclusion are essen -
tial to achieving the Sustainable Development 
Goals.”163 As such, the GDC must be firmly set 
within the SDGs, and used to “rescue and up -
lift” it through the use of digital technologies.164 
Finally, as affirmed by fifteen Member States 
during the President of the General Assembly 
OCA Dialogues (see figure 4.2), it is crucial that 
the GDC should be built on human rights pro -
tection foundations.165 
Given differences among Member States, in -
cluding three differing views from permanent 
members of the Security Council, on how to 
effectively govern technology, the Global 
Digital Compact offers a unique platform 
to bridge divides and garner cooperation on 
technological issues. During the PGA’s OCA 
Dialogues, no country opposed the need for 
the development of the GDC, and several 
offered unique insights on what it should 
constitute. A GDC firmly rooted in the SDGs 
would be better positioned to overcome the 
challenge of Member State differences, build -
ing on a blueprint of global cooperation on 
which stakeholders already agree. As such,the 
Global Digital Compact should not aim to 
be too detailed and comprehensive a set of 
principles, but rather act as a vision for global 
cooperation over technological governance, 
allowing different modalities and avenues 
for alliances to organically develop from this 
instrument. Nevertheless, at its very essence, 
the GDC ought to represent a standard-set -
ting, compliance-measuring, and publicizing 
entity, promoting cooperation through ade -
quate incentives for relevant stakeholders, as 
opposed to being a governing and enforcing 
entity. Therefore, a key aspect of the GDC, in 
order to ensure full ownership among rele -
vant state and non-state actors, should be to 
reflect a multistakeholder consensus. 
Whereas the Secretary-General, in the Our 
Common Agenda report , outlined seven 
broad themes across for the Global Digital 
Compact (reflecting the Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation’s key themes), it is important for this instrument’s principles to ensure sustain -
ability and account for the development and 
governance of future technologies, whose ef -
fects we cannot begin to imagine at present. 
Emerging technologies will play key roles in 
the promotion or abuse of human rights and af -
fect the character and course of armed conflict,  
with implications for other international instru -
ments such as the New Agenda for Peace (see 
section V). As such, it is important to develop 
the GDC in a manner which is, simultaneous -
ly, forward-thinking and flexible; its principles, 
therefore, cannot be developed solely to meet 
the challenges of the present. 
Consequently, we propose consideration of the 
“3-I’s” framework of innovation, infrastructure  
and information for the Global Digital Compact. 
These categories serve to demarcate challenges 
arising from technologies, yet are open-ended 
enough to allow adaptation as existing technol -
ogies advance and new technologies emerge, 
such as Artificial Intelligence, a topic that was 
insufficiently addressed in the OCA report. For 
instance, the challenges of algorithmic bias and 
issues of unsustainable and unethical sourcing 
of materials for AI could be addressed under 
innovation , improving access and connectivity 
to AI-products could be addressed under infra -
structure , and the protection of human rights 
and data privacy could be solved under infor -
mation . Any subsequent challenges arising from 
AI (or other emergent technologies) could be 
further tackled under the “3-I’s” framework. 
Below are suggested core principles and key 
commitments envisaged under each element 
of the proposed framework.
Innovation
This first category of the “3-I’s” framework refers 
to governance of the conceptual, developmen -
tal, and roll-out stages of technological prod -
ucts, covering elements such as ethical coding, 
non-biased algorithms, fair employment, and 
human-rights-cognizant materials sourcing. It 
is important to note that as technologies develop, 
this category can expand to include a wider set of 
issues, as and when they arise. Accordingly, the 
core principle under this category is to ensure 
that technological development, from ideation GDC
32
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY GDCand sourcing to creation and deployment, strives 
to promote public interests, safeguards environ -
mental sustainability, and adheres to basic hu -
man rights norms.
As such, the international community should 
commit to the development of human-centered 
innovation and ensure greater coordination and 
cooperation among researchers, policymakers, 
and the tech industry through the promotion 
of policy environments conducive to cross-bor -
der data flows, research and development, and 
value-added data services.166 Various examples 
of human-centered technology policies already 
exist and can serve as bedrock principles for 
the GDC. For instance, Italy’s national AI policy 
recommends the development of AI to be cen -
tered around the active promotion of econom -
ic and social inclusion, in addition to ensuring 
human rights and sustainability.167 The inter -
national community as a whole should broadly 
commit to using technologies to achieve this 
aim in the course of achieving the wider 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
Governments, at the stage of innovation of 
technological products, should commit to 
the strict regulation of products such as mass 
surveillance software, bugging devices, and 
hacking technology to ensure compliance with 
human rights. This includes working collabo -
ratively with the private sector and civil soci -
ety to develop and test products to ensure that 
they meet the qualifications of existing regu -
lations, and that they do not create avenues for the abuse of human rights in areas which 
are, hitherto, unregulated. As such, govern -
ments should actively commit, in partnership 
with the private sector and civil society, to the 
development of global ethical guidelines for 
future iterations of digital technologies. 
Along the same vein, the private sector should 
commit to ensuring the ethical and responsible 
development of new technologies, to include es -
chewing forced and bonded labor and exploit -
ative sourcing practices, as they relate to both 
workers and the environment. Businesses can 
ensure their compliance to ethical standards 
by agreeing to engage with international bod -
ies and non-governmental groups overseeing 
standardization, such as the ITU, while aligning 
their human resources guidelines with existing 
international treaties and publishing transpar -
ency reports on their practices. The GDC could 
thus produce a list of accountability criteria for 
human rights and sustainability that the private 
sector should abide by, which could be measured 
from a combination of company disclosure re -
quirements, transparency reports, and pledges.168 
Accordingly, the private sector should also com -
mit to the development of unbiased and fair al -
gorithms to ensure that their products are not 
continuing forms of discrimination and struc -
tural violence.  This can be measured through 
enhanced partnerships with civil society and 
the involvement of experts in their consulta -
tive and developmental deliberations, while also 
employing more diverse staff. 
The international community should commit to 
the development of human-centered innovation 
and ensure greater coordination and cooperation 
among researchers, policymakers, and the 
tech industry through the promotion of policy 
environments conducive to cross-border data 
flows, research and development, and value-added 
data services.
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 33
As mentioned earlier, a core principle of the 
GDC under the innovation category refers to 
the promotion of the development of sustain -
able and secure technologies, which can have 
far-reaching positive implications for future 
generations (see section III) and building du -
rable peace (see section V). The Global Digital 
Compact could, therefore, benefit from a dig -
ital sustainability index to measure the pri -
vate sector’s progress in creating sustainable 
digital products and solutions, similar to the 
Asia Pacific Digital Sustainability Index.169 This 
would require an agreement among Member 
States, the private sector, and civil society 
on how to measure and weigh sustainability 
through appropriate indicators.
Introducing a rating system that judges the eth -
ical practices of companies and other entities, 
the GDC could incentivize the normative uptake 
of its principles. The Global Digital Compact 
should further leverage other standardization, 
such as the International Labor Organization’s 
or the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory’s 
cultural codes of conduct pertaining to supply 
chain security.170 Civil society could strength -
en this aspect of the GDC, by committing to 
collaborate more frequently with governments 
and the private sector on the development of 
ethical, fair, and diverse technological products. 
Consequently, governments should seek to pro -
mote and improve the inclusion of civil society 
by increasing their participation in working 
groups, consultations, and committees. 
Civil society could also commit to promoting 
human rights under the category of innovation 
by actively researching, advocating for, and 
ensuring that governments and businesses are 
held accountable for not following through on 
their commitments. The GDC could serve not 
only to introduce core principles and key com -
mitments from relevant stakeholders, but also 
to provide a platform and the means for these 
stakeholders to interact more frequently and 
effectively. A key commitment taken by all three 
sets of stakeholders–Member States, the private 
sector, and civil society—should be to cement 
sustainable cooperation with each community 
and to create avenues for trilateral consultation.Infrastructure
Fostering universal access and connectivity to 
technological infrastructure and the Internet 
merit consideration as a core principle under 
this category of the GDC; adherence to Agenda 
2030 also means that such infrastructure should 
be environmentally sustainable and secure. As 
a result, the international community—partic -
ularly development agencies and the interna -
tional financial architecture—should commit 
to fast-tracking the SDGs where concerned with 
technology, while promoting digital develop -
ment and the core principle of the Internet as a 
“digital public good”, the physical and financial 
availability of which should transcend bound -
aries of state and socioeconomic status.  
In light of the negative impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic, the food and energy crises caused 
by the war in Ukraine, and a potential global 
economic recession, it is imperative for interna -
tional development and financial organizations 
to assist governments struggling to provide and 
maintain basic technological infrastructure for 
their citizens. The international community 
should, thus, commit to the promotion of re -
gional, transnational, and international global 
connectivity, to ensure that each individual is 
able to access high-speed Internet as a funda -
mental human right. In order to promote a shift 
toward the uptake of sustainable technologies, 
the international community should further 
commit to easing access to, and increasing local 
development of, green technology by providing 
a platform where governments, the private sec -
tor, and civil society can exchange best practic -
es and information, while cementing partner -
ships to ease the flow of intellectual property 
and facilitate funding. 
Accordingly, governments should commit to 
ensuring fair and equitable access to digital 
infrastructure as a basic human right, while 
promoting international cooperation in digi -
tal infrastructure development. This remains 
key, for instance, in ensuring that systems are 
not inherently biased or perpetuate structural 
violence. For instance, in the U.S., one report 
found that only 30 percent of Black Americans 
have access to high-quality broadband con -
nections, compared to 70 percent of whites.171 GDC
34
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY GDCWhile recognizing the competing needs facing 
governments, new public sector-facilitated  ini -
tiatives are essential to connect more people to 
the Internet, subsidize expansion to keep the 
cost of Internet low for the average person, and 
eliminate social (e.g., class-based or racial) dis -
parities in digital access. 
The private sector can also work to improve 
access to digital infrastructure, particularly 
in broadband blind spots. For example, the 
Starlink project by SpaceX has helped to provide 
satellite Internet connectivity to thirty-four 
countries—most recently in Ukraine, allowing 
essential services, such as hospitals and clinics, 
to remain connected amidst conflict.172 Such 
initiatives highlight the changing nature of the 
private sector as a key actor in international 
affairs, and the need to utilize public-private 
partnerships to maximum effect in order to 
promote human rights, peace and stability, and 
development. The Global Digital Compact can 
embed and promote such public-private part -
nerships by appointing champions from the pri -
vate sector, similar to the Champion Countries 
Initiative in the Global Compact for Migration.
While the private sector can commit to improving 
access to technology for individuals, governments 
and the international community must continue 
to intervene, including by instituting common 
standards under the auspices of the UN, to en -
sure that improved access to technology does not 
occur at the risk of environmental damage or in -
terference with important scientific endeavors.173
Governments should also provide clear guid -
ance to the private sector on the development 
and use of environmental-friendly products. 
They should commit to creating investment 
environments conducive to local development of digital technologies, such as incubator hubs 
and special technology zones, and to support 
the transformation of technologies (requiring 
economies of scale) into utilities. Governments 
should further establish means to monitor envi -
ronmental impacts, including carbon emissions, 
and to enforce environmental standards.
The private sector should commit to embedding 
social and environmental impacts into the Key 
Performance Indicators of technology product 
development teams. It can do this by commit -
ting to the development of energy-efficient 
and environmentally friendly, as well as secure, 
technologies that do not emit excessive carbon. 
Furthermore, the business community should 
commit to digital literacy training, capaci -
ty-building, and improving the cybersecurity 
awareness of its teams. It should further strive 
to develop cost-effective technologies based on 
economies of scale, so that individuals do not 
have to pay a high price for digital connectivity.
Moreover, in order to promote financial in -
clusion while bridging the digital divide, the 
private sector should commit to conducting 
stakeholder consultations with civil society 
groups,  such as women and girls, minorities, 
and those with disabilities. Through these di -
alogues, its stated aim should be to develop 
effective products and services focusing on a 
variety of ages, classes, ethnicities, income lev -
els, abilities and gender identities. Civil society 
could collaborate with governments in order 
to provide increased digital literacy and capac -
ity-building skills, at local and national levels. 
Where governments lack capacity or sufficient 
resources, they should commit to greater co -
operation with civil society and establish a 
firm partnership with organizations on the Governments, at the stage of innovation of 
technological products, should commit to the strict 
regulation of products such as mass surveillance 
software, bugging devices, and hacking technology 
to ensure compliance with human rights. 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 35
ground in order to promote access to technol -
ogy, particularly for marginalized groups and 
communities, such as people with disabilities 
and an aging population. Furthermore, civil 
society should both campaign and train tech 
developers on the need for environmentally 
friendly infrastructure.
The 2020 Roadmap for Digital Cooperation 
observed that “close to half of all countries in 
the world do not have a Computer Emergency 
Response Team” that could appropriately 
deal with critical cyber threats emerging on 
short notice.174 Governments should commit 
to ensuring the cybersecurity of their criti -
cal infrastructure projects, such as the energy, 
emergency services, communications, finan -
cial services, food and agriculture, health -
care, and other sectors they consider critical. 
Collaborative, multilateral cybersecurity ini -
tiatives, such as the Global Forum on Cyber 
Expertise, can also make great strides in pre -
venting cybercrime and lessening vulnerability 
to cyber attacks, in large part thanks to co -
operation between governments, civil society, 
and the private sector.175 
Information
The final category of the “3-I’s” framework 
refers to the manner in which individuals and 
citizens use technology, and the types of risks 
associated with that use. As a core principle, 
stakeholders should verify that the development 
or ownership of technology does not adversely 
impact human rights and confirm that human 
rights apply equally online. Furthermore, they 
should abide by the principles of promoting 
data protection, suppressing the prevalence 
of false information online and ending the 
information gap resulting from it, protecting 
against censorship or Internet shutdowns, and 
promoting multistakeholderism in governance. 
Accordingly, Member States should commit 
to greater cooperation and information / best 
practice exchange on the subjects of counter -
ing disinformation, data protection, and human 
rights abuse online. 
Member States should work together, where 
possible in light of political differences, to en -
sure that their national policies on the above subject matters are aligned or, at the very least, 
not introducing loopholes that malevolent ac -
tors can abuse. The international community 
should coordinate on clearer global responses 
to the “infodemic” of misinformation, similar 
to the level of coordination which takes place 
between international security agencies on the 
issue of illicit financial flows and counter-ter -
rorism. Ideally, this should follow from a multis -
takeholder approach that engages governments, 
the private sector, and civil society.
Governments and civil society should commit to 
improving media literacy among citizens, where -
as the private sector should commit to increasing 
the transparency and accountability of the media 
landscape.176 The latter could include flagging 
content deemed misleading or false, as social 
media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and 
Instagram have begun doing in recent years.177 
Although some laws and regulations are emerg -
ing to increase platforms’ responsibilities (for 
instance the U.K’s proposed amendment to the 
National Security Bill and Online Safety Bill re -
quiring social media companies to proactively 
tackle foreign state-sponsored disinformation), 
online platforms still independently administer 
their businesses, and their guidelines on the han -
dling of mis / dis-information should be trans -
parent and evenly applied.178 Additionally, civil 
society groups should launch “correct informa -
tion” campaigns that attempt to convey the truth 
on topics rife with conflicting information, as 
well as to give the general population the tools 
to identify misinformation.
Data privacy is another major issue that in -
ternational organizations, governments, the 
private sector, and civil society should com -
mit to resolving. Based on an agile gover -
nance approach, the international communi -
ty should commit to greater data protection 
mechanisms in order to decrease complexity 
across jurisdictions, reduce costs to firms, and 
increase government efficiency through bet -
ter interagency cooperation and information 
sharing.179 For instance, Japan’s Society 5.0 ini -
tiative requires the establishment of an acces -
sible platform, whereby data can be stored and 
utilized across borders without monopolies, 
while guaranteeing privacy and security.180 All GDC
36
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY NA4Pgovernments should consider data protection 
to be a national interest and commit to refrain 
from conducting mass surveillance against 
their citizens. Toward this end, governments 
should beef up their requirements to report on  
data breaches and encourage their citizens to 
report complaints of data compromises.
A key aspect of this proposed information 
component of the Global Digital Compact is 
ensuring that the private sector and civil so -
ciety collaborate intensively on cyber-security, 
in order to protect breaches against data pri -
vacy. Accordingly, the private sector should 
enhance their systems’ ability to protect user 
data from cyber attacks, and should not han -
dover user data to a third-party. Governments 
or civil society can review the data policies 
of companies and evaluate if they fall under 
the acceptable data regulation. Internet users 
should further be given simple, straightfor -
ward ways to control their options for sharing 
personal information. Similarly, civil society 
groups should commit to advocating for better 
data privacy and educating the public on ways 
to secure their online data, given their previ -
ous success in doing so.181
Finally, the backbone of the Global Digital 
Compact is human rights. Therefore, the 
Member States should commit to upholding 
human rights online, including through the 
protection of net neutrality (which refers to 
the principle of fair and equitable access to 
all content and applications irrespective of 
source). Consequently, governments should 
commit to safeguarding the free and public 
nature of the Internet. If governments do seek 
to censor speech, they should do so on the ba -
sis of meeting the needs of legality, necessity, 
and proportionality. They should also commit 
to taking appropriate steps to protect human 
rights online and to prevent any form of mal -
treatment, abuse, or extortion. Accordingly, 
governments should commit to taking the 
necessary steps toward the prevention, inves -
tigation, prosecution, and redress of abuse. 
The private sector, conversely, should commit 
to adhering to all standards and internation -
al principles surrounding human rights on -
line and offline, and express transparency in providing access to a company’s internal in -
formation when conducting assessments. Civil 
society plays a key role in bridging the divide 
between governments and the private sector, 
by researching, advocating, and campaigning 
at local, regional, and international levels for 
amendments to existing laws and principles to 
be more inclusive in the digital age.
Overcoming Potential Spoilers 
and other Bottlenecks 
Three key challenges arise from the proposed 
Global Digital Compact. First , the UN’s Office of 
the Special Envoy on Technology, which is likely 
to be tasked with overseeing the compact’s imple -
mentation, must ensure that proper incentives are 
put into place in order to attract key stakeholders. 
These diverse groups must be encouraged to de -
velop an agenda which they feel obliged to commit 
to and measure progress against (i.e., to be held 
accountable). At present, the Our Common Agenda  
report provides key themes that reflect a rich set 
of issues the GDC could encompass. Moreover, 
the Special Envoy Office’s efforts in calling for 
stakeholder inputs provides a promising step to -
ward fostering the inclusion of distinct and some -
times competing perspectives. 
Second , the Office of the Special Envoy must en -
sure the private sector and civil society’s full and 
unrestrained engagement in the GDC, not only 
through broad-based consultations, but also in the 
instrument’s full development and implementa -
tion stages. Accordingly, the Office should ensure 
the engagement of these diverse stakeholders by 
increasing their access to relevant working groups, 
committees, workshops, and consultations. 
Third and finally , the multiplicity of stakeholder 
perspectives necessarily means the existence 
of contradictory objectives, which the Global 
Digital Compact  must both welcome and effec -
tively navigate to ensure that the instrument’s 
core principles and major commitments are 
both ambitious and overarching, without be -
ing watered down. An important debate among 
Member States, the business community, and 
civil society groups that can be anticipated 
during consultations includes the protection 
of state sovereignty versus the facilitation of a 
shared consensus on fundamental issues.182
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 37
Global Policy Framework
The spirit of the original, 1992 Agenda for Peace 
can be recaptured by a new and dynamic ap -
proach to sustaining peace, and promoting a 
mutually reinforcing approach to justice and se -
curity in the twenty-first century, that focuses 
on prevention, the changing nature of conflict, 
inclusiveness with an emphasis on innovations 
in Women, Peace & Security and Youth, Peace 
& Security, and reform of the UN Collective 
Security Architecture. 
Challenges 
In recent decades, global understanding of—
and the nature of—violent conflict and corre -
sponding broader threats to international peace 
and security have shifted. Most notably, mod -
ern conflicts have become multi-dimensional in 
character due to climate change, cyberwarfare, 
resource rivalry amidst rising population de -
mands, record numbers of displaced persons and refugees worldwide, pandemic diseases, 
and resurgent authoritarianism (figure 5.1).184 
Yet, even as tools for examining the factors driv -
ing deadly conflict have advanced, the lack of a 
coherent and comprehensive approach to con -
flict prevention  stymies effective UN responses 
to simmering future conflicts, from local to re -
gional and global levels.185 Preventive action is 
further undermined by acute social, economic, 
and political inequalities within and between 
nations, social fragmentation, and economic in -
security, each factor reinforced by growing mis -
trust of a multilateral system perceived as weak 
and inefficient; by a lack of consensus among 
the great powers on multiple sensitive issues; 
and by rapid technological changes that, as they 
build global connectivity, also let the world be 
easily flooded with disinformation that is de -
signed to erode trust.186 Against this blanketed 
yet fractured backdrop, UN and other organi -
zations’ efforts to prevent, mitigate, and resolve 
violent conflict have failed to curb a relatively V. Advancing Inclusive and Just Peace 
through a New Agenda For Peace
“Of all our dreams today, there is none more important—or so hard to realize—than that of peace in 
the world.” —Lester B. Pearson, former Prime Minister of Canada183
Figure 5.1: New peace & security realities and challenges
Source: Adapted from the DPPA Innovation Cell Vision Document, April 2020.NA4P
Existential  
Climate CrisisContinued  
ExclusionCyber  
WarfareReaction vs. 
PreventionGlobal  
Commons

38
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY NA4Psteady rise in the number of non-state initiated 
and sustained conflicts (see figure 5.2). 
Effective regional cooperation and mechanisms 
to prevent conflict are equally urgent in areas 
beyond the realms of traditional security. Non-
traditional security challenges stemming from the 
climate emergency and water insecurity demand 
close attention. According to UN-Water, nearly 
half of the world’s population lives in water scarce 
areas at least one month per year, and this could 
grow to affect some 4.8–5.7 billion people by 2050 
and fuel conflict globally.187 In South Asia, disputes 
persist between India and China over rights to 
the Yarlung Tsangpo-Brahmaputra River.188 In the 
Tigris-Euphrates river basin, schisms between 
Turkey, Syria, and Iraq continue to prevent ef -
fective co-management of the basin’s rivers.189 In 
Africa, water-related violence is prevalent across 
the continent, including in Nigeria and Mali.190 
Beyond the severe socioeconomic and political 
impacts, patterns of climate and water-induced 
migration are also emerging—as per the World 
Bank, in 2021, water deficits were linked to 10 per -
cent of the rise in global migration.191 These trends 
can be considered threat multipliers for instability 
and civil unrest.192
Cyberwarfare has grown in scale and frequency. 
In 2021, ransomware attacks on governments increased globally; the finance and healthcare 
industries, in particular, saw increases of 243 
percent and 328 percent in ransomware target -
ing.193 Cyber attacks on critical infrastructure 
pose especially serious security risks for states, 
as electrical grids, banking systems, transporta -
tion networks, nuclear power plants, and weap -
ons systems can be targeted.194 The perpetrators 
are both state and non-state actors, with states 
investing the lion’s share in digital-related tech -
nologies such as robotic weapons, unmanned 
drones, and computer software and hardware 
for spearheading cyberattacks.195 
Unsustainable use of the global commons is a 
third rising threat to international peace and 
security.196 When the integrity of the oceans, at -
mosphere, Antarctica, and even outer space are 
threatened, the potential for inter-state conflict 
over scarce resources grows.197 The ocean, in 
particular, faces multiple challenges, including 
rising temperatures, over-exploitation, and pol -
lution.198 These threats have a negative impact 
on marine life, including fisheries (overall fish 
populations have decreased seventy six per -
cent between 1970 and 2016), and have placed 
the livelihoods and food security of more than 
three billion people at risk who rely on fish for 
a living and basic sustenance.199 To supplement Source: Davies, Pettersson & Öberg, “Organized Violence 1989-2021 and Drone Warfare,” 2022.Figure 5.2:  Number of non-state-initiated violent conflicts since 1989NUMBER OF CONFLICTS90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 39
their incomes and protect their fisheries, some 
fishermen have turned to piracy.200 Meanwhile, 
outer space also faces global commons related 
challenges and can provide an arena for violent 
conflict. While the 1967 Outer Space Treaty 
affirmed that space should only be used for 
peaceful purposes and free of nuclear weap -
ons, it has failed to limit the deployment and 
use of weapons in space.201 The ambiguity of 
international laws regarding military capacities 
in space creates the possibility of a space arms 
race between states seeking military superiority 
over their competitors, as the rivalry between 
the United States and Russia demonstrates.202 
While marked progress on the youth, peace and 
security and women peace and security agendas 
has been achieved through global and regional 
institutional mechanisms, these same mecha -
nisms have yet to be integrated effectively at 
the national level, eroding their ability to deliver 
effectively on global-level commitments made 
to youth and women. Consequently, despite in -
ternational efforts, 67.6 million young women 
and men are still severely affected by unemploy -
ment.203 Moreover, in most national policymak -
ing, young people are still considered beneficia -
ries rather than partners in peace processes.204 
At the same time, an estimated one-in-four 
young people are affected by violence or armed 
conflict. In 2015, 90 percent of all deaths re -
sulting from violent conflicts involved young 
males.205 Despite the strength of the Women 
Peace and Security Agenda leading to over 100 
countries enacting national plans for its imple -
mentation, women still remain largely absent 
in peace and security space.206  More alarming 
still is how both government armed services 
and insurgent groups alike have resorted to 
sexual violence as a weapon of war, especially 
in Ukraine, Myanmar, and Tigray.207
The International Community’s 
Limited Response to 
Building Peace
In 1992, UN Secretary-General Boutros 
Boutros-Ghali introduced  An Agenda for Peace , 
a set of recommendations and concepts for 
ensuring peace and security in the post-Cold War world. UN Member States reflected over 
time much of the agenda’s thinking in their 
deliberations on conflict management and 
post-conflict peacebuilding in the Security 
Council and General Assembly, and from 
2006, in the Peacebuilding Commission as 
well. The 1995 Supplement to an Agenda for 
Peace  further reiterated the UN’s commit -
ment to peace-capacity-building and imple -
menting preventive diplomacy. 208
In 2000, in an effort to improve peacekeep -
ing doctrine and operations at the field level, 
the Report of the Panel on UN Peace Operations  
(“Brahimi Report”), critiqued the conduct of UN 
peacekeeping during the 1990s.209 However, as 
the 2015 High Level Panel on Peace Operations 
(HIPPO) report argues, the implementation of 
reforms within the UN remains contingent on 
bureaucratic templates which are unable to ca -
ter effectively to fastidious and rapidly evolv -
ing geopolitical scenarios.210 In the same year 
as the HIPPO report, reviews of both the UN 
Peacebuilding Architecture and implementa -
tion of UN Security Council Resolution 1325 
on Women, Peace & Security concluded that 
UN peacebuilding efforts are still largely un -
der-prioritized and under-resourced by the or -
ganization, and women—although recognized 
as agents of change—participate in very few 
peace processes and are rarely able to have their 
voices amplified.211
The growing number of intractable conflicts 
worldwide has taken a toll on the UN’s conflict 
management system.212 Deadly attacks perpe -
trated against peacekeepers, and the use of dig -
ital technology by non-state actors to spread 
dis / mis-information, have both undermined 
the credibility of UN peacekeeping missions.213 
Moreover, the decades-long “Global War on 
Terror”, beginning with the 9/11 attacks and soon 
followed by wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, have 
added a new layer of complexity and a count -
er-terrorism lens to the UN’s work to prevent, 
manage, and recover from deadly violent con -
flict. Although Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has 
profoundly exhibited the devastating impact of 
interstate conflicts, the quantum of such con -
flicts has declined exponentially.214 It is impera -
tive to note that along with internal conflicts, the NA4P
40
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY NA4Pnumber of internationalized-internal conflicts 
have surged in recent years (see figure 5.3). 
Additionally, conflicting national interests (es -
pecially among great powers)—coupled with 
funding constraints and a rapidly growing 
global population—have further watered-down 
some of the UN’s ambitions and inhibited its 
ability to implement an inclusive and effective 
dialogue on unresolved issues, such as rising 
food insecurity and a growing refugee crisis in 
the developing world. In March 2020, in the ear -
ly days of the COVID-19 pandemic, great pow -
er divisions were compounded by the Security 
Council’s inability to pass a resolution endors -
ing Secretary-General António Guterres’s call 
for a global cease-fire.215 UNHCR estimated that 
89.3 million people, globally, were experienc -
ing displacement due to conflict and violence 
in 2021, more than double the number in 2012, 
capping a decade of steady increase that threat -
ens to overwhelm the UN’s relief agencies.216
Fortunately, the concept of peacebuilding has 
returned to its origins (by covering the full con -
flict spectrum, rather than only post-conflict 
situations), with a heightened focus on conflict 
prevention. The changing nature of conflict and 
emerging threats to humanity demand that the 
UN and other global and regional institutions embrace their practical and moral obligations 
to address these complex and inter-related chal -
lenges head-on.
Emphasizing the importance of effective mul -
tilateralism and focusing on prevention, the 
Independent Commission on Multilateralism, 
in its 2016 final report Pulling Together: The 
Multilateral System and Its Future , called for a 
“New Agenda for Peace” to serve as a plan of 
collective action to address present and future 
challenges that transcend borders: human dis -
placement, climate change, and pandemics.217 
The new agenda would aim to break away from 
existing silos to support implementation of 
new reforms, promote inclusive decision-mak -
ing which involves civil society and local actors, 
and pave the way for more participatory gover -
nance models.
With the Security Council’s inability to prevent 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the current global 
collective security system’s flaws have become 
more self-evident.218 Besides the well-trodden 
arguments about the failure of the membership 
of the Security Council to reflect present day 
political realities, the Council’s veto mecha -
nism is frequently abused to protect permanent 
members’ narrow national interests. Russia and 
China have both vetoed humanitarian efforts Figure 5.3:  Armed conflict by type (1946 - 2021)
Source: Davies, Pettersson & Öberg, “Organized Violence 1989-2021 and Drone Warfare,”  2022 . 
1946
1949
1952
1955
1958
1961
1964
1967
1970
1973
1976
1979
1982
1985
1988
1991
1994
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2018
202160
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0Number  
of Conflicts
T Extrastate    T Interstate    T Internationalized Intrastate   T Intrastate
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 41
related to the conflicts in Syria and Burma, and 
for the first time in over fifteen years, on a reso -
lution in May 2022 seeking to impose new sanc -
tions on North Korea following its latest missile 
tests.219 In 2021, the United States blocked pro -
posed resolutions calling for a cease-fire in the 
Gaza conflict.220
Meanwhile, the February 2022 emergency ses -
sion on Russian aggression against Ukraine 
demonstrated an opportunity for a more prom -
inent United Nations General Assembly role in 
the realm of peace and security. The invoca -
tion of emergency special sessions by means 
of the Uniting for Peace resolution, initially 
introduced in 1950, shows that the UNGA can 
assert itself, but as demonstrated in the case of 
Ukraine, it still requires new tools to navigate 
around Security Council paralysis. Similarly, 
the Peacebuilding Commission, as an adviso -
ry body to the Security Council and UNGA, 
does not have independent authority or deci -
sion-making power and is, thus, unable to effec -
tively coordinate UN peacebuilding efforts.221 In 
short, the timely and progressive reform of the 
Security Council, UNGA, and Peacebuilding 
Commission should be given renewed focus and 
political momentum through the New Agenda 
for Peace, now under consideration for the up -
coming  Summit of the Future.
Major Elements of the Global 
Policy Framework
The Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda 
report makes the case for a New Agenda for 
Peace that intensifies efforts toward reducing 
strategic risks from weapons of mass destruc -
tion, strengthening international foresight, 
and enhancing investments in prevention and 
peacebuilding.222 It sets forth the need to re -
shape responses to all forms of violence, en -
abling UN agencies to address violence holisti -
cally. As Member States also remarked recently, 
this new framework will help to “strengthen 
international foresight” and “prevention”, and 
encourage closer cooperation between the 
United Nations and regional organizations, 
to defuse evolving threats, prevent spill-over, 
and promote stability (see annex 1.3).223 Thus, 
the Secretary-General has called for enhanced support for regional initiatives to fill critical 
gaps and to address complex transnational 
challenges that can fuel instability, such as 
climate change.224
Building on consultations and research follow -
ing the (June 2022) publication of Road to 2023: 
Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the Future , 
a New Agenda for Peace has the potential to 
both recapture and extend beyond the spirit 
of its predecessor, in 1992, by adopting a mod -
ern and dynamic approach toward sustaining 
peace and just security in the twenty-first 
century, focusing on: (i) prevention, (ii) the 
changing nature of conflict, (iii) inclusive -
ness, emphasizing innovations in the Women, 
Peace & Security and Youth, Peace & Security 
Agendas, and (iv) reforming the UN Collective 
Security Architecture.225
Prevention
A reinvigorated focus on conflict prevention 
at local, regional, and international levels 
could both enhance current capabilities and 
introduce new approaches. Near the start of 
his tenure, in mid-2017, the Secretary-General 
established a High-Level Board for Mediation 
(“the Board”), composed of current and former 
world leaders, to provide mediation support 
to Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General.226 Nevertheless, recent examples 
of significant peace processes (for example, 
Afghanistan227 and the Abraham Accords228) 
reflect the diminishing mediation role of the 
United Nations. 
The introduction of new foresight capabili -
ties through the New Agenda for Peace could 
strengthen the Board’s and other UN capabil -
ities’ reach to anticipate and prevent conflicts 
in a manner that not only addresses short-
term challenges, but undertakes comprehen -
sive long-term planning.229 The political role 
of the country-level UN Resident Coordinator 
should also be enhanced, in coordination with 
UN’s Department of Political and Peacebuilding 
Affairs (DPPA), to help host country actors tack -
le underlying conflict drivers, avert local-level 
escalatory conflict dynamics, and strength -
en national prevention capacities. This could 
take the form of the deployment of more UN NA4P
42
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY NA4PPeace and Development Advisers, which have 
provided thought leadership to UN Resident 
Coordinators in more than sixty countries since 
2004, with backstopping support from DPPA 
and UNDP.230
This enhanced role for UN Resident 
Coordinators could be bolstered further 
through the rapid deployment of a Standby 
Team of Senior Mediation Advisors within 
DPPA’s Mediation Support Unit (MSU), who 
are equipped to provide technical support and 
advice on local priorities. 231 Together, these 
enhanced preventive capacities could help 
UN field-based operations better adapt to the 
changing nature of violent conflict worldwide.232 
The background of individuals tapped from 
the Board, MSU, the Peace and Development 
Advisers, and other capabilities should reflect 
the geopolitical realities on the ground and 
strive to bring both global and regional powers 
on the same page. Furthermore, regional and 
local actors working to facilitate peace should 
be encouraged and provided technical support 
from the United Nations.233  
In order to improve the UN’s mass atrocity 
and wider conflict prevention decision-mak -
ing capabilities, the New Agenda for Peace 
should further focus on strengthening the UN 
system’s conflict analysis and crises warning 
capabilities, including a systematic approach 
toward information gathering, assessment, 
and dissemination of analysis and advice to 
Member States. Building such capacities to 
prevent violence requires close attention to 
the political, social, and institutional factors 
known to generate it. The New Agenda for 
Peace could extend beyond current concep -
tualizations of the “Responsibility to Prevent” 
and search for greater consensus of both na -
tional and international institutions regarding 
appropriate international action when states 
are unable or unwilling to uphold their conflict 
prevention and civilian protection responsi -
bilities.234 In emphasizing the Responsibility 
to Prevent, UN agencies and programs could 
be called upon to develop a plan of action, in 
consultation with regional and civil society 
partners, to review the relevance of their work 
around the broader Responsibility to Protect.235 The Secretary-General’s role under Article 99 
of the UN Charter could also be sharpened, as 
advocated by the “veto initiative” introduced 
by Liechtenstein and adopted, in April 2022, by 
the General Assembly.236 Article 99 has been 
given a wide interpretation by some states and 
leading scholars, entrusting the Secretary-
General with the prerogative to establish a 
fact-finding mission or international commis -
sion of inquiry, and to further offer good offic -
es for prevention or resolution of conflicts.237 
If the International Court of Justice (ICJ) 
and International Criminal Court (ICC) were 
strengthened to fulfill their mandates by in -
creasing their enforcement powers, preserving 
their independence, and innovating available 
tools (e.g., the ICJ’s advisory opinion and the 
ICC Prosecutor’s ability to investigate war 
crimes enumerated under the Rome Statute), 
these international courts could also contrib -
ute to international preventive action to curb 
and deter deadly violence.238
Our Common Agenda calls for expanding the 
role of the UN Peacebuilding Commission 
(PBC) to more geographical and substantive 
settings, as well as for addressing cross-cutting 
issues of climate change, gender equality, de -
velopment, and human rights from a preven -
tive perspective.239 In this spirit, and deriving 
lessons from the UN Human Rights Council’s 
Universal Periodic Review, the PBC could es -
tablish a Peacebuilding Audit tool to monitor 
various indicators associated with the onset of 
violent conflict. Early warning from this new 
mechanism would better inform decision-mak -
ing by both the Peacebuilding Commission and 
Security Council and enable earlier and more 
effective preventive action. The Peacebuilding 
Audit would be consistent with current ef -
forts tracking Member States’ progress toward 
meeting their commitment to SDG 16, while 
privileging prevention over mitigation-related 
indicators. 
In Our Common Agenda, the Secretary-General 
also makes the case for a renewed approach to 
disarmament to ensure human, national, and 
collective security. The New Agenda for Peace 
provides an opportunity for stronger commit -
ments on the non-use of nuclear weapons and a 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 43
time frame for their elimination, enhancing co -
operation to prevent and to counter terrorism.240 
Similarly, this new framework could identify 
ways forward for dealing with lethal autono -
mous weapons, facilitating the start of negoti -
ations toward a legally binding treaty.241 Finally, 
the New Agenda for Peace should recognize the 
deleterious impact of the illegal trade of small 
arms and light weapons and prioritize the effec -
tive implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty. 
An important indicator of progress involves full 
state adherence to international humanitarian 
law when trading conventional weapons.
The Changing Nature of Conflict
Moving past the decades-long emphasis 
on counter-terrorism (beginning with the 
September 2001 terrorist attacks on the New 
York World Trade Center and the Pentagon), 
the New Agenda for Peace should further ad -
dress the changing nature of conflict, giving 
special attention to climate change and water 
security, cyber-warfare (including disinfor -
mation and misinformation), and the two-way 
interplay between sustainable security and a 
healthy global commons. 
With climate change fast becoming a defining 
issue of our time, water scarcity has intensi -
fied and water related violence is on the rise. 
To address these climate crisis-related secu -
rity threats, proactive forms of hydro-diplo -
macy, new regional governance mechanisms, 
and legally binding transboundary water gov -
ernance commitments are urgently needed.242 
A first step toward an invigorated approach 
to hydro-diplomacy should include the ratifi -
cation, by all countries sharing waters, of the 
1997 United Nations Convention on the Law 
of the Non-navigational Uses of International 
Watercourses.243 The Convention entered into 
force with the clear objective of ensuring an eq -
uitable and sustainable use of international wa -
tercourses for present and future generations. 
Additionally, basin-wide treaties and agree -
ments that legally bind upstream and down -
stream riparian countries to cooperate and 
engage in regular dialogues may help to dilute 
any water-related tensions. The Indus Waters 
Treaty of 1960, for example, is regarded as one of the world’s most successful water sharing 
endeavors that has stood the test of two wars 
between India and Pakistan.244 Nevertheless, 
any such existing treaties must also be period -
ically reviewed and updated to meet the needs 
of ever-changing environments. Furthermore, 
regular data sharing and policy transparency 
between governments within a shared basin 
should become a norm. One positive illustration 
of this is the Senegal River Basin Development 
Organization, which facilitates the successful 
sharing of water resources through joint invest -
ments between regional states in river basin de -
velopment programs.245
With states’ increased reliance on digital infra -
structure and systems, cyber-warfare has also 
become an emerging dimension of interstate 
conflict. Cyberthreats are borderless, unpre -
dictable, and potentially untraceable, making 
accountability difficult to establish.246 This un -
derscores the need for international collabora -
tion to face these common threats. 
In addition to adopting new defining princi -
ples and norms on free and secure digital us -
age—as outlined in section IV of this report 
concerning the Global Digital Compact—le -
gally binding agreements are also needed to 
address these security risks. A Digital Geneva 
Convention is one possible direction.247 Like 
the original Geneva Conventions, a Digital 
Geneva Convention would establish norms and 
protocols to protect civilians on the internet—
without introducing restrictions in online con -
tent, or unnecessary surveillance—and regu -
late state behavior in cyberspace. Adjusting 
the scope of prohibited weapons to include 
anti-satellite weapons that affect access to cy -
berspace would also help to ensure the peace -
ful use of this globally shared space. Such a 
convention would discourage state-sponsored 
cyber-warfare and suggest collective measures 
for combating cyber-terrorists. 
Digital cooperation must also be a multistake -
holder effort.248 Governments (through the UN 
General Assembly and other international fora), 
the private sector, and civil society must work 
together if policy responses to threats of cy -
ber-warfare are to be effective and inclusive. NA4P
44
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY NA4PTragedies of the commons are another set of 
fast changing global threats with the potential 
to undermine global well-being. There exists  
several potential triggers for conflict, such as 
disputes over what falls within sovereign or 
global jurisdiction, as well as a state’s impact on 
pollution and over-extraction of shared resourc -
es. To mitigate against a rise in violent conflicts, 
multilateral and legally-binding agreements on 
stewardship of the global commons must be 
updated or, in some cases, signed and ratified by 
certain states. Although some legal agreements 
already exist for the high seas,249 atmosphere,250 
Antarctica,251 and outer space,252 states must re -
affirm their commitment to protecting these 
examples of the global commons. 
The high seas and outer space are prominent 
examples of risks facing the global commons. 
The oceans’ important role as a food source and 
economic well-spring means that pollution and 
unsustainable fishing place the global public 
good provided through oceans at severe risk. 
Depletion of fisheries due to climate change 
and overuse has, in turn, fueled illegal fishing 
and armed conflict.253 A strict implementation 
of Sustainable Development Goal 14, which 
calls for protecting thirty percent of the world’s 
oceans by 2030, managing fisheries sustainably, 
and drastically reducing pollution, is an import -
ant first step toward maintaining the high seas.254 
In addition, amending the United Nations 1982 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), 
to reflect the modern environmental issues of 
climate change and excessive resource deple -
tion, represents another crucial step. 
Outer space, like the high seas, faces threats of 
pollution and conflict.255 Through the testing of 
satellite targeting missiles, the United States, 
Russia, and China create unwarranted risks for 
increasingly valuable space assets of all nations; 
threaten the peace in space; and risk a growing 
possibility of an outer space arms race. The mil -
itarization of space also highlights inequality 
of access and uneven technological capacities 
among states. Amending the 1967 Outer Space 
Treaty to move beyond nuclear armaments and 
include a ban on anti-satellite weapons is a nec -
essary step for facilitating greater international 
cooperation in space. The UN Office for Outer Space Affairs has further begun to encourage 
access for developing country space-faring en -
tities to space research facilities, infrastructure, 
and information through its Access to Space for 
All initiative.256 
Inclusiveness
Building on commitments to ensure just, peace -
ful and inclusive societies, as set forth in SDG 
16 and the UN75 Declaration,257 forging a New 
Agenda for Peace involves moving beyond sim -
ply the “lack of violence” to an understanding 
of peace fully centered around human rights, 
gender equality, diverse youth perspectives, de -
mocracy, accountability, and justice. In order to 
build such a system nationally, regionally, and 
globally to ensure robust, positive peace, it is 
necessary to view the problem through gender 
and next generation lenses.258 It also means 
creating an equitable international framework 
that targets inequality based on gender, race, 
ethnicity, sexual orientation, disability, class 
and other forms of discrimination, as well as 
the complex dynamics created as these issues, 
and their solutions, intersect. 
The UN has led many efforts to enshrine great -
er equity in international peace and security. 
On October 31, 2000, the Security Council ad -
opted Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and 
Security, stressing the role of women in advanc -
ing peace—subsequently strengthened through 
the passage of several follow-on resolutions.259 
In 2020, with the adoption of Resolution 2538, 
the Security Council further recognized the 
indispensable role of women in improving the 
performance, effectiveness, and credibility of 
UN peacekeeping operations.260 The success of 
initiatives such as Women4Yemen, the MAUJ 
for Development, and the UN Global Compact’s 
Business for Peace network, in engaging more 
and more with other non-state actors and in -
creasing women’s participation in the peace -
building realm, must be followed by systemic 
restructuring to allow for increased access and 
participation of women in preventing war and 
building peace.261
However, the compounded effects of multiple 
crises of the past few years speak to the need 
for meaningful reforms to overcome continued 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 45
discrimination and inequities that impede ef -
fective, collective remedial action worldwide. 
As called for in Our Common Agenda , we need 
a system that allows for “networked and inclu -
sive multilateralism” and is “geared at solving 
problems by drawing on the capacities and 
hearing the voices of all relevant actors.”262 
Importantly, this new system must include 
and emphasize the voices of women and young 
people, “one in four of which are affected by 
violence or armed conflict.”263 
The Youth, Peace and Security Resolutions 2250 
(in 2015), 2419 (in 2018) and 2535(2020) sought to 
change the narrative from viewing young people 
as perpetrators of violence, based on a reactive, 
panic-based approach, to a policy opportuni -
ty-based approach that engages young people as 
partners in peace and security, thus establishing 
the younger generation as a political force for 
peace.264 Significant results have been achieved 
since the adoption of the resolutions, including 
the publication of an independent progress study 
reaffirming the importance of youth inclusion 
in peace processes. Moreover, national action 
plans, coalitions, policies, and funding streams 
have been created in order to address the grow -
ing demand for youth protection, inclusion, and 
participation in peacebuilding.265 However, the 
UN must pursue  efforts to develop a policy op -
portunity approach involving the younger gen -
eration to strengthen peace processes, including 
at the grass-roots level, and transforming trust 
deficits into trust opportunities. 
The evidence suggests that young people, who 
are the majority of many societies, feel excluded 
from various forms of decision-making efforts, 
especially when they are the ones inheriting 
the negative consequences of the tragedy of 
the commons or depleted global public goods. 
The Youth, Peace, and Security agenda frames 
this as the violence of exclusion. Transforming 
the violence of exclusion into trust and part -
nerships that embrace policy opportunities can 
become the bedrock for preventive action.266
Our Common Agenda  calls for enhancing youth 
political participation, including by establishing 
a “Youth in Politics” index that tracks the open -
ing of political space for youth around the world. 
A new, dedicated United Nations Youth Office (agreed to, in September 2022, in a UN General 
Assembly resolution) could integrate  the current 
activities of the Office of the UN Youth Envoy 
and further serve as an anchor for UN system co -
ordination and accountability on youth matters 
across the world body’s three substantive pillars 
of peace, sustainable development, and human 
rights.267 Additionally, youth representation in 
decision-making could be bolstered through a 
UN Youth Council that advances the 2030 Youth 
Framework.268 The New Agenda for Peace should 
call upon Member States to ensure that all UN 
system institutions are representative of the peo -
ple whom they seek to serve, thereby acknowl -
edging the substantive contributions of young 
people to global problem-solving. 
Investments in quality education could fur -
ther assist young people, particularly girls, 
in overcoming structural barriers that limit 
their participation and capacity to influence 
decision-making on any number of pressing 
global challenges, including threats to peace 
and security.269 Along similar lines, financing 
for youth leadership must be ensured, along 
with sound monitoring and evaluation mech -
anisms.270 This would generate incentives for 
youth-oriented programming, and leverage re -
sources that could help countries transition out 
of conflict by transforming the broader political, 
social and economic systems that are excluding 
young people.271 In addition, the New Agenda for 
Peace could help to establish a knowledge man -
agement platform that connects and integrates 
the efforts of different youth constituencies.272 
Doing so would not only help to avert duplica -
tion of efforts, but to provide opportunities for 
sharing best practices. 
Reforming the UN’s Collective  
Security Architecture
The UN Collective Security framework seeks 
to fulfill a central organizational mission: the 
maintenance of international peace and security. 
When authoritarian regimes give way to more 
democratic forces and responsive governments, 
the UN is poised to assist through preventive 
diplomacy, peacekeeping, and peacemaking. 
However, as noted earlier, these tools and the 
system of collective security that employs and NA4P
46
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY NA4Punderpins them need significant upgrading to 
better cope with current and emerging threats 
to international peace and security.
To mobilize the political will required to build 
that capacity, the New Agenda for Peace could re -
inforce and supplement ongoing efforts to reform 
and strengthen the Security Council, General 
Assembly, and Peacebuilding Commission.273 It 
could further lend support to the Secretary-
General’s recently proposed Emergency Platform. 
Priority ideas the New Agenda for Peace could 
champion include the following:
Expand Security Council Membership  
and Allow Re-election of Non-permanent 
Members 
Many proposals have called for expanding the 
Security Council, particularly its permanent 
membership.274 But any negotiation for Council 
expansion is limited by geopolitical constraints, 
as manifested in the more than decade-long ef -
fort of the Intergovernmental Negotiations on 
Security Council Reform (and its precursors, 
initiated in 1993). For this reason, the interna -
tional community should focus on more limited, 
feasible reform measures, even some that may 
also require Charter amendment. Among these 
would be expanding the number of non-perma -
nent seats by six, and allowing the immediate 
re-election of non-permanent members, who 
are currently not allowed to serve consecu -
tive terms. Allowing for immediate re-election 
would bring more regional expertise to UNSC 
decision-making and create incentives for elect -
ed Member States to act fairly and take respon -
sibility in the Council. The General Assembly 
should also redraw the regional groups for 
the allocation of non-permanent UNSC seats, 
with particular regard for the impact on Sub-
Saharan countries in the African Group.Assert the General Assembly’s Role through 
the Uniting for Peace  Resolution
On March 2, 2022, the General Assembly, acting 
under Uniting for Peace  (see table 5.1 for previous 
instances) denounced the Russian Federation’s in -
vasion of Ukraine with the support of 141 Member 
States.275 It was followed, on April 26th, by the con -
sensus passage of Resolution 76/262, which calls 
for the President of the General Assembly to con -
vene the UNGA “within 10 working days of the 
casting of a veto” and to hold a debate on the sub -
ject of the veto.276 An initiative of Liechtenstein, 
Resolution 76/262 should complement more fre -
quent use of the Uniting for Peace  resolution when 
the UNSC fails to act in critical matters of inter -
national peace and security. To avoid appearing to 
usurp the Security Council’s primacy, invocation 
of United for Peace  should require a two-part pro -
cess initiated by a procedural vote of a qualified 
majority of the UNSC determining that a veto 
was used in “bad faith,” followed by a two-thirds 
majority vote in the UNGA, as is required for im -
portant questions.277 The debates mandated by 
Res. 76/262 on veto usage might inspire UNSC 
members to initiate this process.
Upgrade the Peacebuilding Commission  
to an Empowered Council 
A more authoritative UN Peacebuilding Council 
(“new PBC”) could complement and assist in the 
Security Council’s challenging task of maintain -
ing global peace and security. With an expand -
ed mandate, the Peacebuilding Council would 
have enhanced powers and responsibilities to 
lead on conflict prevention (including through a 
new Peacebuilding Audit tool) and peacebuilding 
policy development, coordination, and resource 
mobilization on critical second- and third-or -
der conflicts, freeing up the Security Council to 
concentrate on first-order conflicts that most These tools and the system of collective security 
that employs and underpins them need significant 
upgrading to better cope with … threats to 
international peace and security.
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 47
Table 5.1: Past Invocations of Uniting for Peace and General Assembly Outcomes
SituationSecurity Council 
Resolution Vetoed byUniting  
for Peace  
invoked byGeneral Assembly Outcome
Korea 
(1951)USSR SCGeneral Assembly Resolution 498 (V) “confirmed 
the mandate of US-led forces in Korea” and “kept 
the UN involved in the diplomatic efforts to end 
the war”
Middle 
East (1956)FR and UK SCadopted seven resolutions, including Resolution 1000 
(ES-I) mandating the UN Emergency Force (UNEF)
Hungary 
(1956)USSR SCadopted five resolutions, including Resolution 
1004 (ES-II) mandating a commission of inquiry 
into foreign intervention in Hungary
Middle 
East (1958)USSR SCadopted Resolution 1237 (ES-III) calling for early 
withdrawal of foreign troops from Jordan and 
Lebanon.
Congo 
(1960)USSR SCadopted Resolution 1474 (ES-IV) confirming the man -
date of the UN Operation in the Congo (ONUC).
Bangladesh 
(1971)USSR SC “UN Assistance to East Pakistan Refugees.”
Afghanistan 
(1980)USSR SCadopted Resolution ES-6/2 calling for the immedi -
ate, unconditional and total withdrawal of foreign 
troops from Afghanistan.
Middle 
East (1982)US SCadopted Resolution ES-9/1 declaring Israel a non 
peace-loving state and calling on members to 
apply a number of measures on Israel
Middle 
East (1967)USSR draft resolution 
failed  
to get nine votesGAadopted six resolutions, including Resolutions 2253 
and 2254 (ES-V) calling on Israel to rescind unilat -
eral measures in Jerusalem
Palestine 
(1980)US GAadopted eight resolutions (ES-7/2 through ES-7/9) 
calling for the unconditional and total withdrawal 
of Israel from territories occupied since 1967
Namibia 
(1981)FR, UK and US GAadopted Resolution ES-8/2 condemning South 
Africa for occupation and calling for assistance to 
the liberation struggle
Palestine 
(1997)US GAadopted inter alia, Resolution ES-10/14 requesting 
an advisory opinion from the International Court 
of Justice
Ukraine 
(2022)Russia (voted against) SC U.N. Security Council Resolution 2623 called for 
the eleventh emergency special session of the U.N. 
General Assembly on the subject of the 2022 Russian 
invasion of Ukraine. Albania and the U.S. introduced 
the resolution before the U.N. Security Council, 
which adopted it on February 27, 2022. Russia voted 
against while China, India and the United Arab 
Emirates abstained. As this was a procedural reso -
lution, no permanent member could exercise their 
veto power.
Source: Original Table, Stimson Cente r. Based on data gathered from the Security Council Report, Security Council Deadlocks and Uniting for Peace, 2013.  NA4P
48
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY threaten international peace and security. The 
new PBC would focus on countries and regions 
in non-peacekeeping and post-conflict envi -
ronments where it can monitor and coordinate 
actions to prevent conflict recurrence. This pro -
posed upgrade would follow the precedent of the 
UN Commission on Human Rights’ transforma -
tion, in 2006, into the UN Human Rights Council. 
In addition, a reinvigorated focus on prevention 
calls for adequate, predictable and sustained fund -
ing of the Peacebuilding Fund, including from 
assessed dues, thereby strengthening the world 
body’s core mission of sustaining peace.278 
Stand up a new Emergency Platform  
within the UN system 
To better anticipate and prepare for future glob -
al shocks and large-scale crises and effectively 
complement the formal emergency management 
roles of established UN bodies, from the Security 
Council to the UN Office for the Coordination 
of Humanitarian Affairs (and its Inter-Agency 
Standing Committee of field-operational civil so -
ciety organizations), a proposed new Emergency 
Platform—expanding on what was called for in 
Our Common Agenda —could identify gaps in in -
ternational action to address not only humanitar -
ian emergencies (such as fears of a growing global 
food crisis) or violent conflict, but also political 
crises or threats arising from new technologies.279 
The Platform  could convene both the usual and 
some less traditional entities, within and beyond 
the UN system, that could play a role in ameliorat -
ing a particular crisis. Through careful yet swift, 
context-sensitive analysis and skillful diploma -
cy, the Secretary-General could also add-value 
to existing arrangements by forging, through the 
Platform, an international and multistakeholder 
consensus on the underlying causes of, and the 
most urgently needed measures to manage and 
over time resolve, a complex emergency. In ad -
dition, the Emergency Platform would benefit, 
at the operational level, from the ability to draw 
upon new rapid response capacities.
Overcoming Potential Spoilers 
and other Bottlenecks 
Advancing the New Agenda for Peace will re -
quire skillful analysis, political mobilization, and courageous leadership to overcome po -
tential spoilers and bottlenecks, such as ve -
to-wielding permanent members of the Security 
Council, developing countries leery of having 
their sovereignty threatened, and financial 
constraints as the world slowly emerges from a 
global pandemic (while possibly entering a glob -
al recession).280 Skillful analysis is needed, for 
instance, to understand the emerging drivers of 
violent conflict and derive appropriate histori -
cal lessons from how best the General Assembly 
can fill, at times, a void in Security Council lead -
ership in maintaining international peace and 
security. Political mobilization remains funda -
mental to whether women and youth will con -
tinue to make inroads in asserting their voices 
in the hope of achieving more durable, inclusive, 
and just peacebuilding outcomes. And coura -
geous leadership will be needed in pursuing up -
grades in the Peacebuilding Architecture from, 
for example, emerging powers and countries 
making significant financial contributions, as 
they continue to await long overdue Security 
Council reform.
Pursued simultaneously, skillful analysis, politi -
cal mobilization, and courageous leadership can 
best position UN Member States, the Secretariat, 
civil society, and the private sector to address the 
current geopolitical and geoeconomic context. 
The accelerated time-frame—between now and 
September 2024—in preparing for the Summit of 
the Future, combined with the spillover effects 
of the war in Ukraine, should be leveraged, in 
particular, to navigate around or over would be 
spoilers and bottlenecks.
“Peace” has remained an elusive, aspiration -
al goal for millions and must feature at the 
heart of the Summit of the Future agenda. The 
Ukraine crisis and the others of our time invite 
us to rethink fundamental assumptions, includ -
ing what it means to secure and maintain peace 
and the role the UN can play in doing so. A New 
Agenda for Peace that captures the above four 
building blocks could serve as a guiding light to 
help the UN and broader international commu -
nity promote a more robust notion of positive 
peace and better safeguard the future for all 
nations and peoples.
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 49
VI. Road to the Summit of the Future
“The United Nations needs to reinvent itself to remain relevant in the future, in a post-pandemic world. 
Fulfilling the objectives … outlined by the UN in its ‘ Our Common Agenda ’ report and its proposal for 
a Summit of the Future will be essential towards accelerating the implementation of the SDGs and 
ensuring that the talks and discussions finally turn into actions on the ground to truly leave no one 
behind.” —Youngest Councilor of the World Future Council, Kehkashan Basu281
UN Secretary-General António Guterres’ 
report, Our Common Agenda , called for a 
Summit of the Future, timed to coincide 
with the General Assembly’s high-level week 
in September 2023. Preceded by preparatory 
events and consultations, the summit would 
work to “advance ideas for governance ar -
rangements in the areas of international con -
cern mentioned in this report, and potentially 
others ….”282 Among its anticipated and poten -
tially far-reaching outcomes are a Pact for the 
Future, a Declaration on Future Generations, 
a Global Digital Compact, and a New Agenda 
for Peace.
This concluding section explores two sce -
narios for the Summit of the Future’s pro -
posed timing, detailing the potential ad -
vantages of convening the summit sooner 
rather than later (while acknowledging that 
this contentious issue was finally addressed 
in the newly passed September 2022 SOTF 
Modalities Resolution). It further outlines 
the current state-of-play and practical ideas 
for taking forward the Declaration on Future 
Generations, a Global Digital Compact, and 
a New Agenda for Peace in the run-up to the 
Summit of the Future. In addition, it under -
scores the central role and proposed mile -
stone activities for civil society contributions 
to the summit’s preparations. Together with 
champion countries and leaders across the 
UN system and the business community, di -
verse civil society groups are poised to inject 
dynamism and creative thinking into a high 
ambition coalition for renewing, strength -
ening, and repurposing our institutions and 
approaches to global governance.2023 or 2024? Why Timing Matters
Given the universal consensus behind the 
UN75 Declaration that commissioned the Our 
Common Agenda report, the vocal misgivings 
and even distrust expressed toward the UN 
Secretariat by some Member States—including 
Brazil, Pakistan, Cuba, and Russia—with regard 
to the report was remarkable.283 It resulted in 
the watering-down of an otherwise straight -
forward follow-through procedural resolution 
approved, in November 2021, by the General 
Assembly, ultimately calling into question the 
value of such “consensus-based resolutions.”284 
Indeed, in an effort to move quicker and with 
greater ambition, sentiment is growing among 
Member States to allow dissenting votes on 
such resolutions without derailing them, in -
cluding for modalities resolutions and major 
intergovernmental declarations that have his -
torically operated through consensus.285 
The companion volume to this report, Road to 
2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the 
Future , detailed three major fault-lines threaten -
ing a meaningful strengthening of a global gov -
ernance innovation agenda, namely tensions be -
tween great powers, between the Global North 
and South, and between both Member States 
and the UN Secretariat on the one hand, and 
between Member States and civil society organi -
zations, on the other.286 Against this backdrop—
and despite a serious effort, in early 2022, by 
the President of the General Assembly to build 
greater trust and confidence through a five-part 
Our Common Agenda thematic consultation se -
ries287—divisions have persisted in the run-up 
to and preparation of a modalities resolution for 
the Summit of the Future. 
50
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Unsurprisingly, many of the same countries 
which prolonged negotiations on  the November 
2021 Our Common Agenda support resolution 
have raised objections with convening the 
Summit of the Future in September 2023 in 
New York—preferring a proposed postpone -
ment until the start of the General Assembly’s 
79th session in September 2024 (box 6.1).288 The 
arguments for postponement have ranged from 
needing more time given the ambitious sum -
mit agenda under consideration and continued 
confusion and lack of consensus surrounding 
many Our Common Agenda proposals to a wor -
ry that the Summit of the Future could divert 
scarce political attention, resources, and the 
time required for planning the already agreed 
“SDGs Summit” to be convened during UNGA High-Level Week in September 2023. At the 
same time, some potential advantages of 2024 
are allowing more time for serious substantive 
preparations, multistakeholder consultations, 
and intergovernmental negotiations, possibly 
grouped within several thematic committees 
and associated task forces (see below); having 
sufficient time to incorporate results from the 
September 2023 “SDGs Summit” into the plan -
ning of the Summit of the Future; and encour -
aging the initial proposed “Biennial Summit 
on the World Economy” to take place now, in 
September 2023, alongside the “SDGs Summit” 
in direct support of a broad-based and green re -
covery coming out of the COVID-19 pandemic.
While Member States decided in their modal -
ities resolution to postpone the summit until 
Box 6.1: Major Elements of the SOTF Modalities Resolution
Passed by consensus on September 8, 2022, major elements of  
the Summit of the Future Modalities Resolution include:
1. Decides  that the Summit 
of the Future has an im -
portant role to play in reaf -
firming the United Nations 
Charter, reinvigorating 
multilateralism, boosting 
implementation of existing 
commitments, agreeing on 
concrete solutions to chal -
lenges, and restoring trust 
among Member States;
3. Further decides  that 
the Summit of the Future 
will be held on 22 and 23 
September 2024, in New 
York, preceded by a prepa -
ratory ministerial meeting 
on 18 September 2023;
4. Further decides  to adopt 
at the Summit a concise, 
action-oriented Outcome 
document (‘A Pact for 
the Future’), agreed in 
advance by consensus 
through intergovernmen -
tal negotiations;16. Requests  also the 
President of the General 
Assembly to appoint co-fa -
cilitators no later than 31 
October 2022, one from a 
developed country and one 
from a developing country, 
to facilitate open, transpar -
ent and inclusive inter-gov -
ernmental consultations on 
the preparatory process of 
the Summit, and decides  
that the inter-governmental 
preparatory process of the 
Summit shall consist of:
• consultations to determine 
the scope of the Summit, 
topics and organization of 
the interactive dialogues 
and the process of nego -
tiations to conclude the 
Outcome Document; and
• negotiations to conclude 
the Outcome Document 
with adequate time for the 
negotiating sessions;17. Encourages  major 
groups and other stake -
holders to participate and 
engage in the preparatory 
process of the Summit of 
the Future;
18. Further decides  that 
the Summit should be 
well-coordinated with, 
and complementa -
ry to, the Sustainable 
Development Goals 
Summit (the high-level 
political forum convened 
under the auspices of the 
General Assembly), and 
requests the President of 
the General Assembly to 
ensure the two Summits 
are well-coordinated;
Source: Original Box, Stimson Center. 
Data: General Assembly, “Modalities 
of the Summit of the Future” (7 
September 2022, L.87).
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 51
September 2024 (preceded in September 2023 
by a preparatory ministerial meeting), some of 
the counter-arguments arising against post -
ponement were:
First, avoid letting-up political momentum for the 
summit : Precisely because of the bumpy start 
in passing a simple procedural resolution, in 
November 2021, to recognize Our Common 
Agenda —coupled with the further geopoliti -
cal uncertainty caused by Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine in February 2022—the newfound politi -
cal momentum for a Summit of the Future should 
not be taken for granted (including recent prog -
ress on the Declaration on Future Generations’ 
elements paper and the recently passed UN 
Youth Office resolution). Moreover, the timely 
and integrated policy issues to be addressed by 
global governance reform ideas taken-up at the 
summit, across complex political, economic, so -
cial, and environmental arenas, have not less -
ened in terms of political or moral urgency, but 
have rather increased. For some states, and many 
in civil society, some three years ago—during 
UN75 in 2020—was the time for action. For the 
Secretary-General, the OCA report of 2021 was 
supposed to be the “wake-up-call.” The world 
cannot afford to wait any longer.
Second, let the Summit of the Future complement 
the SDGs Summit : Far from potentially work -
ing at cross-purposes, the “twin-summits” can 
bolster one another in multiple practical ways, 
just as other back-to-back summits have done 
so during UNGA High-Level Week (in 2019, for 
instance, a Climate Action Summit, followed 
by the SDG Summit and multiple high-level 
meetings).289 For one, side-by-side, they both 
can demonstrate how strengthening global 
institutions and approaches can help to en -
hance national and sub-national capacities for 
delivering on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development during the present Decade of 
Action. Both summits are equally concerned 
with ensuring generous, reliable, and sustained 
(public and private) financing for the closely 
interlocking issues of the UN system and sus -
tainable development financing. Together, they 
can also forge effectively a strong, coherent, and 
mutually reinforcing public narrative;  these in -
tertwined summits are, for instance, creating tangible multiplier effects to tackle the under -
lying causes of political and criminal violence, 
mitigate against the chief factors accelerating 
climate change, and build opportunities to 
move people and nations out of extreme pov -
erty and toward sustainable development.
Third, give UN Secretary-General Guterres more 
time to see through summit implementation : The 
last Secretary-General to oversee a comprehen -
sive UN reform effort was Kofi Annan at the time 
of the September 2005 (UN60) World Leaders 
Summit. Its comprehensive (nearly 40 pages, 
with dozens of new commitments) Outcome 
Document was adopted with only fifteen months 
to go in Secretary-General Annan’s tenure at 
the helm of the world organization, limiting the 
amount of time he and his team had to ensure 
successful follow-through to the UN60 summit.290 
Holding the summit at UNGA High-Level Week 
next year would have given António Guterres and 
his colleagues more than three years to ensure 
effective follow-through on a Pact for the Future 
and related instruments (see below).
Fourth, free up the UN calendar to convene a 
Biennial Summit in 2024 and the World Social 
Summit in 2025 : With the world only slowly 
emerging from a global pandemic, while pos -
sibly entering a global recession, the urgency 
of adopting–at the Summit of the Future next 
year–a newly proposed Biennial Summit on the 
World Economy, as introduced in the OCA re -
port, only grows.291 Specifically, another year 
should not be lost in having the staff of the UN, 
international financial institutions, WTO, and 
G20 presidency come together to prepare an 
ambitious global green growth and recovery 
agenda at an inaugural meeting, in September 
2024 in New York, of the Biennial Summit. 
Similarly, a World Social Summit, as further 
proposed for 2025 in the Our Common Agenda 
report, is needed to address the social dimen -
sions of a green recovery from the pandemic, as 
well as to begin to chart new universal develop -
ment goals post-2030.
Fifth and finally, refrain from convening poten -
tially divisive summits near a U.S. presidential 
election : Especially when the United States, a 
superpower, is highly polarized in its domes -
tic and foreign policies between its two main 
52
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY political parties, when countries have a choice, 
it is best that they steer clear of the U.S. polit -
ical calendar and the possibility of the United 
Nations becoming a political punching-bag and 
misused straw man in the final leg of a hotly 
contested presidential election.
Convening the Summit of the Future in 
September 2023 would have better recognized 
the gravity of the issues demanding a more 
urgent and capable response by the world’s 
governance system, including the rising risk 
of nuclear war and the growing realities of 
runaway climate change, resurgent poverty, 
and myriad threats to human rights. While the 
summit will always result in some “unfinished 
business,”  time is of the essence, and we must 
never forget that success begets success—
achieving some high-profile wins in the near 
future can generate momentum and improve 
conditions for subsequent, even more ambi -
tious changes. In sum, world leaders can ill-af -
ford to take the foot off the pedal on the road 
to a much-needed and, arguably, long overdue 
gathering of global statespersons to prepare 
the United Nations for 21st century threats 
and opportunities. At the same time, with 
the recent decision to push back the Summit 
of the Future to September 2024, Member 
States and other partners in civil society and 
the private sector should now make full use 
of the additional twelve months to ratchet-up 
ambition and realize the full potential of this 
once-in-a-generation opportunity for the in -
ternational community. For concrete ideas 
on an ambitious and participatory two-year 
consultative process with multiple preparatory 
meetings outside of New York too, please see 
the Stimson report Beyond UN75: A Roadmap 
for Inclusive, Networked & Effective Global 
Governance  (June 2021, Section V, pp. 76-83).
Advancing Future Generations, 
Digital Cooperation, and Peace 
on the Road to the Summit of  
the Future
Secretary-General António Guterres’ Our 
Common Agenda  report has begun to take 
the UN75 Declaration from vision to action. Through the recently finalized modalities res -
olution, UN Member States have outlined a for -
mal, UN Member States will outline a formal 
negotiation process, culminating in the adop -
tion of a proposed “Pact for the Future” and 
related instruments at a Summit of the Future. 
Without such an intergovernmental negotiating 
framework, many of Our Common Agenda’s and 
related global governance innovation proposals 
are unlikely to come to fruition.
As recommended in the companion volume 
to this report, Road to 2023: Our Common 
Agenda and the Pact for the Future , the Pact for 
the Future—main outcome document of the 
Summit of the Future—should be organized 
around four main thematic pillars, whose work 
would support a fifth, integrative pillar. Key 
themes could be: i) peace, security, and human -
itarian action; ii) sustainable development and 
COVID-19 recovery; iii) human rights, inclusive 
governance, and the rule of law; and iv) climate 
governance. The fifth pillar would promote in -
tegrated, system-wide reforms in connection 
with the ideas put forth by the four other pillars, 
following a holistic approach to networked, in -
clusive, and effective multilateralism. 
Ideally, UN Member States would focus on 
building consensus around a select number of 
priority institutional, policy, legal, operational, 
and normative global governance strengthen -
ing proposals (e.g., around 8-10 per thematic 
pillar, plus 8-10 more to promote integrated, 
system-wide innovation). To mitigate against 
an unwieldy Pact for the Future and to en -
sure strong linkages with the twelve UN75 
Declaration commitments—as well as propos -
als from Our Common Agenda , the High-Level 
Advisory Board on Effective Multilateralism, 
and elsewhere—Member States could be en -
couraged to rank their proposals according to 
criteria involving desirability, policy impact, 
urgency, cost, and implementation feasibility.
At the same time, the Declaration on Future 
Generations, a Global Digital Compact, and a 
New Agenda for Peace, as detailed in this report, 
represent three comprehensive and unique 
global policy frameworks that both individu -
ally complement (and round out) the Pact for 
the Future, falling under one or multiple of the 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 53
Pact’s proposed thematic pillars. Here we pres -
ent the current state-of-play and offer some sug -
gestions for taking forward, on the road to the 
Summit of the Future, each global governance 
innovation instrument:
T Declaration on Future Generations
State-of-play
In June 2022, the President of the General As -
sembly appointed the Permanent Representa -
tives of Fiji and the Netherlands as Co-Facilita -
tors for the Declaration on Future Generations. 
A subsequent Expert Briefing on the declaration, 
held on June 30, 2022, recaptured the essence of 
the PGA’s OCA consultation held earlier in the 
year on future generations, by encouraging con -
structive informal consultations between Mem -
ber States and non-governmental stakeholders.292 
The Executive Office of the Secretary-General 
further called for a new platform to facilitate in -
stitutional follow-up to the declaration, along -
side a Special Envoy for Future Generations. Spe -
cifically, it suggested a mechanism either under 
the General Assembly, or through a repurposed 
Trusteeship Council, as an intergovernmental 
or multistakeholder forum that could ensure 
long-term thinking by considering and acting 
on behalf of future generations.293
During the first informal consultations on the 
Declaration on Future Generations, held on 
July 7, 2022, diplomats stressed the need for 
a Member State driven process that could re -
sult in an action-oriented political declaration 
achieved through consensus. Several Member 
States began to propose priority elements, in -
cluding ensuring that the declaration is “youth 
inclusive” and reinforces the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development.294 Others, especially 
within the Group of 77, cautioned against re -
negotiating existing commitments by Member 
States, while underscoring the importance of 
measures for adequate financing and technol -
ogy sharing.295 At a briefing on Our Common 
Agenda follow-through, held on August 4, 2022, 
the Permanent Representative of Fiji informed 
Member States that the Elements Paper for 
the declaration would be circulated in early 
September and subsequently taken up at an in -
formal consultation planned for 9 September 
(see annex 1.1 for details).296
Way Forward
Building on the current forward momentum for 
the Declaration on Future Generations, three 
sub-committees or task forces (each co-led by a 
UN Permanent Representative from the Global 
North and Global South) could be stood up to 
facilitate work on: i. the Declaration and its chief 
elements; ii. a Council for Future Generations 
to oversee the Declaration’s implementation 
(possibly by repurposing the UN Trusteeship 
Council or through a Stewardship Council); 
and iii. a Special Envoy on Future Generations 
to champion intergenerational equity at the 
highest echelon of the UN system. Building on 
the Declaration on Future Generation’s current 
Elements Paper, the first sub-committee could 
give attention to legal rights and obligations 
toward future generations, realigning political 
incentives in support of future citizens, and the 
role of youth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development and beyond. The second sub-com -
mittee could introduce thinking on a Future 
Generations Review and Intergenerational 
Solidarity Index as important tracking and 
The second sub-committee could introduce 
thinking on a Future Generations Review and 
Intergenerational Solidarity Index as important 
tracking and oversight activities of the proposed 
Council for Future Generations.
54
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY oversight activities of the proposed Council 
for Future Generations. Meanwhile, the third 
sub-committee would focus on the mandate 
and specific resource requirements of the pro -
posed Special Envoy on Future Generations. 
The Declaration on Future Generations and 
its associated components could fall under the 
Pact for the Future’s thematic pillar on sus -
tainable development and COVID-19 recovery 
(though relate closely to all four pillars).
To support the efforts of all three sub-com -
mittees, the Summit of the Future’s secretariat 
could commission research from leading aca -
demics and policy researchers, as well as solicit 
contributions from other diverse actors from 
across civil society. In particular, a “Future 
Generations Campaign,” led by diverse civil 
society organizations in the Global South and 
North, could seek to galvanize the support of 
people worldwide, including young people, in 
championing the rights of future generations 
and speaking up for intergenerational equity 
and justice.
T Global Digital Compact
State-of-Play 
The High Level Panel on Digital Cooperation, 
convened by the Secretary-General in 2018, 
presented its report on The Age of Digital 
Interdependence , in 2019.297 The report while 
focusing on three major goals, which are (a) 
leaving no one behind, (b) focusing on individ -
uals, societies, and digital technologies, and (c) 
creating mechanisms for global digital cooper -
ation, put forth five recommendations, under 
the headings: 
i. Build an Inclusive Digital Economy and 
Society; 
ii. Develop Human and Institutional Capacity;
iii. Protect Human Rights and Human Agency; 
iv. Promote Digital Trust, Security and 
Stability; and 
v. Foster Global Digital Cooperation. 
Shortly afterwards, the Secretary-General’s 
Roadmap for Digital Cooperation, released in 
2020, envisaged key action points for the way 
forward on recommendations pertaining to connectivity, digital public goods, digital in -
clusion and capacity-building, ensuring human 
rights online, regulating AI, promoting digital 
trust and security, and building a more effec -
tive architecture for global digital cooperation. 
In order to lend legitimacy to these aforemen -
tioned goals, the Secretary-General suggested 
a Global Digital Compact in the Our Common 
Agenda,  which aims to strengthen multilateral -
ism by providing a vision for a digitally interde -
pendent world.298 
During the PGA’s thematic consultations on 
Our Common Agenda , held in February and 
March, 2022, notably, no single Member State 
directly opposed the proposal of a Global 
Digital Compact. However, some countries, 
such as Ethiopia, raised concerns on the possi -
bility of politicization of certain elements of the 
proposal, such as underscoring human rights in 
the compact, which may be “instrumentalized 
against states.”299
Annex 1.2 provides highlights of the varied 
Member States’ responses during the PGA’s 
thematic consultations, and discussion 
along similar lines are expected to pick-up 
again with the appointment of Global Digital 
Compact co-facilitators by the President of 
the General Assembly during the seventy-sev -
enth session of the General Assembly. In the 
meantime, the newly appointed Special Envoy 
on Technology, Amandeep Singh Gill, has led 
efforts to liaise with relevant Member-States, 
civil society groups, and related stakeholders 
to create a broad, multistakeholder effort to 
encourage diverse thinking around a Global 
Digital Compact. 
Way Forward
Building on the Office of the Secretary-
General’s Special Envoy on Technology’s 
current online consultations, a Global Digital 
Compact task force or committee—led by one 
UN Permanent Representative from the Global 
North and one from the Global South—should 
be established under the Pact for the Future’s 
thematic pillar on human rights, inclusive gov -
ernance, and the rule of law (while relating 
closely to all four pillars). In support of the 
Office of the Special Envoy on Technology’s 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 55
secretariat functions, independent scholarly 
research could be commissioned and multis -
takeholder dialogues convened to tap insights 
and ideas from tech-savvy non-governmental 
organizations, pioneering businesses, and hu -
man rights groups. 
Major work streams for the Global Digital 
Compact task force could include the “3-I’s” of 
innovation, infrastructure, and information, 
and together, they should give ample attention 
to the thematic issues of connecting people, in -
ternet fragmentation, data protection, human 
rights online, AI regulation, and the digital 
commons. To ensure effective follow-through 
in implementing the Global Digital Compact’s 
core principles and practical guidance, consul -
tations should be undertaken by the task force 
and the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy 
on Technology with relevant multilateral in -
ternet governance fora, including the UN’s 
Internet Governance Forum, the International 
Telecommunications Union’s Council Working 
Group on International Internet-related 
Public Policy Issues and World Summit on 
the Information Society Forum, the Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, 
the Global Conference on Cyberspace, the 
Global Forum on Cyber-Expertise, and the Civil 
Society Internet Governance Caucus. 
T New Agenda for Peace
State-of-play
In response to the UN75 Declarations’ call 
to promote peace and address new security 
threats, the New Agenda of Peace, as intro -
duced by the OCA  report, is proposed by the 
Secretary-General to enhance the capacities of 
the UN to prevent the outbreak and escalation 
of hostilities on land, at sea, in space, and in cy -
berspace.300 The PGA, during his third themat -
ic consultation on the OCA, in February 2022, 
called for enhancing bilateral, multilateral, and 
regional mediation capacities, and preventing 
the proliferation of nuclear as well as conven -
tional weapons.301 Preliminary work on the 
New Agenda for Peace has commenced “under 
the radar” by the UN Department of Political 
and Peacebuilding Affairs (UN DPPA), with 
support from the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs (UN ODA), UN Office of Counter-
Terrorism (UN OCT), and UN Department of 
Peace Operations (UN DPO). At his OCA fol -
low-through briefing to UN Member States, on 
August 4, 2022, the Secretary-General reiter -
ated his hope that the New Agenda for Peace 
would represent a major element of the Summit 
of the Future’s agenda.302 
During the global ceasefire conference, held on 
June 28, 2022, several Member States, especially 
Switzerland, indicated their support for a New 
Agenda for Peace that strives to enhance the 
UN’s prevention toolkit.303 Whereas Western 
countries have called for focusing on cross-cut -
ting issues, such as organized crime, corruption, 
and climate change through the New Agenda 
for Peace,304 Global South representatives have 
have stressed new investments in prevention 
mechanisms, while underscoring that conflict 
prevention is, first and foremost, a state’s re -
sponsibility. On this latter point, representa -
tives of the African Group and Egypt, stressing 
the importance of national ownership, called 
for the UN to support nationally owned and led 
prevention strategies.305
Way Forward
Learning from progress already underway on 
the Declaration on Future Generations, a New 
Agenda for Peace task force or committee—led 
by one UN Permanent Representative from the 
Global North and one from the Global South—
should be created under the Pact for the Future’s 
proposed thematic pillar on peace, security, and 
humanitarian action. It should build directly on 
the preliminary work undertaken by UN DPPA, 
ODA, OCT, and DPO, which should continue 
to perform secretariat duties for the task force. 
Independent research should be commissioned 
from academics and policy researchers to in -
form the task force’s work, and the substantive 
inputs and perspectives of other diverse actors 
across civil society (e.g., youth and communi -
ty-led peacebuilding organizations and partici -
pants in the UN Global Compact’s Business for 
Peace network) should also be sought. 
The New Agenda for Peace could be organized 
around the ideas showcased in this report (name -
ly, prevention; the changing nature of conflict; 
56
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY inclusiveness, emphasizing innovations in the 
Women, Peace & Security and Youth, Peace 
& Security Agendas; and reforming the UN 
Collective Security Architecture), as well as dis -
armament in the areas of conventional weapons, 
new technologies, weapons of mass destruction, 
and space. To overcome potential spoilers and 
circumvent bottlenecks during the framework’s 
negotiations, a global communications effort—
including op-eds and short public service an -
nouncements from prominent religious leaders, 
artists, and Nobel Peace Laureates–could help 
to buttress the analytical work, political mobili -
zation, and leadership led by UN Member States, 
the Secretariat, and partners across civil society.
Member States driven intergovernmental 
negotiations aimed at advancing future gen -
erations, digital cooperation, and peace in 
the run-up to the Summit of the Future will, simultaneously, depend on the level of engage -
ment of myriad non-state actors. Given the 
sheer complexities and large number of policy 
issues to be deliberated upon, and the accel -
erated time-frame, civil society groups could 
play a constructive role in the finalizing of am -
bitious goals within the Pact for the Future 
and associated policy frameworks.
Civil Society’s Role in Maximizing 
the Summit of the Future
Diverse civil society groups—from policy advoca -
cy and service delivery organizations and research 
institutes and universities, to religious move -
ments, youth groups, business representatives, 
journalists, and community-level bodies—made, 
in 2020, an indelible mark on the UN75 Global 
Conversation through some 3,000 civil society 
dialogues worldwide and surveys involving some SOTF preparatory 
ministerial at the 
start of UNGA
Source: Original Figure, Stimson Center.Figure 6.1: Roadmap to the 2024 Summit of the Future
(recommended )
* Only select recommended activities listed.Intergovernmental (and 
Multistakeholder) Track* Civil Society-led Track  
(with UN/Government participation)*
PGA OCA 
Thematic 
Consultations 
commenced
1st of global 
policy 
frameworks 
initiatedHigh-Level  
Advisory Board  
on Effective  
Multilateralism Repor tPact for 
the Future 
negotiation 
commence sFollow-
through 
mechanisms 
establishedFEB
2022
Modalities 
Resolution 
negotiation 
finalizedSEPT  
2022 
JUNE  
2022EARLY
2023SEPT
2023FEB  
2023 
SOTF 
multiple 
instruments 
finalizedJUNE  
2023/4SEPT  
2024OCT  
2024
SEPT  
2021 
“We The Peoples” 
and “Next Gen 
Fellows” reports 
presented
SEPT  
2021 
MAR  
2022 ACUNS 
Annual 
Meeting & 
Global Policy 
Dialogue
JUNE  
2022-24OCT  
2024NOV  
2022Our Common 
Agenda  launched, 
followed by  
GA Res.
Global Policy 
Dialogue 
on Global 
Governance 
InnovationGlobal 
Futures 
Forum 
convened
MAR  
2023 & 
2024Monitor 
Follow-through 
and pursue 
“unfinished 
business”People’s Pact 
for the Future 
commenced
OCT  
2022Global People's 
Assembly convenedPREPARATION OF THE SUMMIT’S “PACT FOR THE FUTURE” OUTCOME DOCUMENT 
Global Policy 
Dialogue on the Triple 
Planetary Crisis
Civil 
Society-led 
Regional 
Futures 
Forums  
commencedMAY  
2022 Summit of  
 the Future
OCA Dialogue 
Discussion Series 
commenced
JAN  
2023SEPT  
2023 & 
2024
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 57
1.5 million people in 195 countries.306 The UN75 
Office reported that the Conversation showed 
“overwhelming public support for international co -
operation” and for a more people-centered multi -
lateralism.307 These civil society-led consultations 
fed into and shaped intergovernmental negotia -
tions on the UN75 Declaration, culminating in a 
joint commitment by Member States to twelve pri -
ority areas during the General Assembly's High-
Level Week.308
Over the coming twelve to twenty-four months, 
in the spirit of making multilateralism more 
networked and inclusive, civil society is further 
poised to inject dynamism and creative think -
ing into a high ambition coalition—alongside 
like-minded states and visionary UN officials—
aimed at maximizing the full potential of the 
Summit of the Future, including its endorse -
ment by world leaders of a Pact for the Future, 
Declaration on Future Generations, Global 
Digital Compact, and New Agenda for Peace. 
Indeed, without the active engagement of civil 
society, the summit may end up merely tweak -
ing the global governance system—rather than 
weighing seriously more ambitious solutions 
commensurate with today’s challenges, threats, 
and opportunities. Major milestone partner -
ship-building activities in the coming year are 
expected to include (as detailed, alongside relat -
ed intergovernmental milestones, in figure 6.1):
People’s Pact for the Future : Building on the 
UN75 People’s Declaration, the People’s Pact 
for the Future will serve as a chief vehicle for 
channeling civil society perspectives into the 
Summit of the Future outcome document(s) ne -
gotiations. Organized around several thematic 
headings and facilitated by an online consul -
tation and monthly and regional forums, the 
People's Pact is expected to be finalized, in early 
2023, at the Global Futures Forum (see below).
Global Policy Dialogues : In March 2022, 
the Global Governance Innovation Network 
and other partners convened a Global Policy 
Dialogue (GPD) in Washington, D.C., with 
civil society policy advocates and researchers, 
UN Ambassadors, and other senior officials to 
further develop proposals from Our Common 
Agenda  and generate new ideas for the Summit 
of the Future. A similar GPD took place in June Box 6.2: Global Policy Dialogue 
proposals for the Summit of the Future
1
Called for the Global Digital Compact  to 
“regulate access to data” and be “community 
service oriented”, in order to strike a better 
balance between private sector interests and 
the needs of the poor.
2
Recommended that the Secretary-General’s 
proposed Emergency Platform  serve as “a 
series of protocols and statements of pro -
cedure (SoPs amounting to—in its simplest 
form—a document that commits the global 
system to come together in times of crisis.”
3
Proposed the need for Border Carbon 
Adjustments  and an Adaptation Fund  that 
is “funded by different countries according to 
their carbon footprint” and supported further 
by multilateral agreements on “green mate -
rials and trade in environmental goods” to 
ensure greater mutual accountability.
4
Suggested that the New Agenda for Peace’s 
disarmament pillar  prioritize a more trans -
parent Arms Trade Treaty, “guided by even 
stronger legal and ethical standards”; “making 
nuclear weapons unacceptable” and address -
ing the “nuclear dilemma”; and the need for a 
Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems Treaty.
Source: Global Governance Innovation Network, Global Policy 
Dialogue on Evidence-Based Solutions and the Road to 2023: 
Strengthening Human Rights, Humanitarian Action, Sustainable 
Trade & Disarmament Cooperation: Summary of Major Findings 
and Recommendations, 2022.
58
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 2022 in Geneva, during the Annual Meeting of 
the Academic Council on the UN System, fo -
cused on global governance and humanitarian 
action, human rights, sustainable trade, and dis -
armament  (see box 6.2). The next GPD, this 
coming January 2023 in Recife, will focus on 
the Triple Planetary Crisis of climate change, 
biodiversity loss, and pollution.
Monthly and Regional Forums : In May 2022, the 
Coalition for the UN We Need and other partners 
convened the first in a series of monthly forums 
to deepen the conversation on the opportunities 
and implications from the Secretary-General’s 
Our Common Agenda report recommendations. 
Similarly, civil society-led online Regional Futures 
Forums will take place, in late 2022, to ensure that 
diverse regional global governance strengthening 
ideas and insights are fed into the preparations 
of the People’s Pact for the Future, the Global 
Futures Forum, and the Summit of the Future.
Global Futures Forum: Civil Society 
Perspectives on the Summit of the Future : 
Proposed for early 2023 in New York by 
the Coalition for the UN We Need, Global 
Governance Innovation Network, and other 
partners worldwide, it aims to: 
i. explore the design and impact of wide rang -
ing proposals for a more inclusive United 
Nations, from the unique vantage point of 
civil society; 
ii. ii. finalize and widely socialize a “People’s 
Pact for the Future”
iii. raise awareness, build ownership, and mo -
bilize energy around the promise of the 
Summit of the Future to deliver on an am -
bitious set of outcomes; and 
iv. model true partnership and creativity worldwide among civil society. 
In doing so, the forum will help to forge  a 
common strategy for civil society engagement 
to shape the intergovernmental negotiations 
toward a Pact for the Future and other antic -
ipated global policy frameworks, including a 
Declaration on Future Generations, a Global 
Digital Compact, and a New Agenda for Peace.
Policy-Oriented Research : All dialogues and 
forums are underpinned by a robust policy 
research track that encourages short policy 
briefs, longer reports, journal articles, books 
and book chapters, and other kinds of schol -
arly, yet policy-oriented, publications. Special 
attention is given to encouraging younger 
scholars and volunteering research, including 
through periodic expert roundtables, to the UN 
Secretary-General’s High-Level Advisory Board 
on Effective Multilateralism.
Information Platform for Civil Society and 
Smaller UN Missions : The Coalition for the 
UN We Need, Global Governance Innovation 
Network, and other partners across civil society 
are committed to supporting civil society advo -
cacy and Member States (especially smaller UN 
Missions) with tools for effective engagement in 
the Summit of the Future's preparations through 
a regular bulletin, steady stream of policy briefs, 
an interactive, web-based outreach platform, and 
other knowledge products and resources in sup -
port of the intergovernmental negotiations.
Op-Eds, Media, and Social Media Outreach : 
Through regular op-eds and other tools, part -
ners across civil society are committed to ex -
panding media and social media outreach to 
raise public awareness and capture the atten -
tion of policymakers and norm-setters on issues 
of global governance renewal, strengthening, Ensure that the intergovernmental negotiations 
both welcome and deliberate on substantive 
inputs provided by scholars, non-governmental 
organizations, major groups, business leaders, and 
parliamentarians ...
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 59
and repurposing.
Meaningful civil society engagement, in the 
spirit of more networked, inclusive, and effective 
multilateralism in the Summit of the Future’s 
preparations, can reassure all stakeholders that 
decisions taken are well-informed, enjoy broad 
social ownership, and generate a sense of co-re -
sponsibility in supporting their implementation. 
Summit preparations should, therefore: 
i. ensure that the intergovernmental ne -
gotiations both welcome and deliber -
ate on substantive inputs provided by 
scholars, non-governmental organiza -
tions, major groups, business leaders, and 
parliamentarians; 
ii. open formal negotiations to public 
observation; 
iii. iii. support national, regional, and global 
multistakeholder forums in the run-up to 
the summit; and 
iv. encourage the involvement of civil society 
and parliamentarians in the national dele -
gations preparing for the summit.
A Once-in-a-Generation 
Opportunity to Renew Global 
Governance
The last time the UN attempted a compre -
hensive overhaul of the entire system was 
September 2005, when world leaders gath -
ered during UNGA High-Level Week to mark 
the sixtieth anniversary of the organization.309 
While Security Council expansion failed and 
ambitious disarmament goals were not real -
ized, a new Peacebuilding Architecture and 
Responsibility to Protect norm were introduced, 
and the enfeebled Human Rights Council was 
upgraded into an empowered Council with new 
tools, such as the Universal Periodic Review, to 
better promote and safeguard human rights.
Nearly two decades later, the Summit of the Future is poised to expand ownership of and 
realize the Our Common Agenda report’s full 
vision and operational potential through inter -
governmental deliberations on a Declaration on 
Future Generations, Global Digital Compact, and 
New Agenda for Peace, all under the chapeau of 
a comprehensive, apex Pact for the Future. This 
once-in-a-generation opportunity to renew global 
governance must not be squandered, not least be -
cause time is running-out to tackle conflict-driv -
ers that may spread and pit great powers against 
each other, to protect millions more people from 
falling into abject poverty, and, perhaps most 
ominous of all, to reverse the most severe effects 
from climate change. Any progress achieved in 
the coming months, however limited at first, must 
be amplified, as an integral step toward building 
momentum for more ambitious goals.
While the Summit of the Future will not repre -
sent a silver bullet in tackling overnight many of 
the world’s most pressing problems, if designed 
and led well, it could set into motion a series of 
events and facilitate, over time, a more thorough 
rethink of our international system and of the 
laws and norms that underpin it. With a deter -
mined focus on the future, time and action are 
of the essence, perhaps in ways incomparable to 
earlier, less globally integrated generations. As 
the clock ticks, the aspirations of billions world -
wide grow in favor of change toward a system of 
global governance that values cooperation over 
discord, global policy based on scientific evi -
dence over fragmentation and disinformation, 
and, most of all, the embrace of human dignity 
and a rich notion of positive peace, where all 
peoples and nations have opportunities to live 
in free, safe, and habitable societies in harmo -
ny with both nature and their neighbors—now 
and in the long-term. But without the reforms 
we need mobilized through a high ambition co -
alition of states, businesses, and civil society 
partners,  “the future we want” will soon be out 
of reach for us, and lost to posterity for good.310With a determined focus on the future, time  
and action are of the essence.
60
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Endnotes
1.   President of the General Assembly, “Vision Statement by Ambassa -
dor Csaba Korosi, Director at the Office of the President of Hungary, 
Candidate for the 77th President of the UN General Assembly,” 3; 
Coalition for the UN We Need, C4UN OCA Report On UN General 
Assembly Informal Interactive Dialogue with the 77th PGA candidate 
H.E. Mr. Csaba Kőrösi (Hungary), 3.
I. Introduction: A Wake-up Call for the Planet
2.   United Nations, “Briefing by the Secretary-General on the Imple -
mentation of the ‘Our Common Agenda’ Report.”
3.   United Nations, Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth 
anniversary of the United Nations.
4.   See United Nations, Declaration on the commemoration of the seven -
ty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations ; and Guterres, Our Common 
Agenda. 
5.   The eight operational tracks listed on the Our Common Agenda Re -
port include the High-Level Advisory Board, Sustainable Development, 
Climate Action, New Agenda for Peace, Global Digital Compact, Outer 
Space Dialogue, Emergency Response Platform for Complex Crisis, 
and the Declaration on Future Generations; Guterres, Our Common 
Agenda , 7.
6.   For details, see Ponzio et. al., Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and 
the Pact for the Future,  Ch. 1; and Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 66. 
7.   United Nations, General Assembly, Follow up to the report of the 
Secretary-General entitled “Our Common Agenda,” 2.
8.   Ponzio et. al., Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the 
Future.
9.   Doha Forum and Stimson Center, Reimaging Governance in a 
Multipolar World  (2019); Coping with New and Old Crises  (2020); and 
Building Back Together and Greener  (2021), as well as expert workshops 
organized in conjunction with the 2018, 2019, and 2021 Doha Forums.
10.   Guterres, “Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.” 
11.   Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, “Tackling Biodiversity & Climate 
Crises Together and Their Combined Social Impacts.”
12.   Mellor, “The Deadliest Extreme Weather Event in Europe: Ex -
treme Heat Waves Fueled by Climate Change Could Fundamentally 
Change the Way We Live”; Mahoozi, “Sandstorms Are Sweeping across 
the Middle East. What’s Going On?”; Al Jazeera, “In Pictures: Monsoon 
Floods Wreak Havoc in South Asia.” 
13.   IPCC, “Summary for Policymakers”; International Crisis Group, 
Climate Security: An input paper for the High-Level Advisory Panel on 
Effective Multilateralism . 
14.   IPCC, Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability..
15.   UNFCC, “Key Aspects of the Paris Agreement”; United Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, “Sendai Framework for Disaster 
Risk Reduction 2015-2030.”
16.    Andorra et al., “The Human Right to a Clean, Healthy and Sustain -
able Environment.”
17.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  3.
18.   United Nations, “World Reaches ‘Tragic Milestone’ of One Million 
COVID-19 Deaths so far in 2022.”
19.   World Health Organization, “UN Report: Global Hunger Numbers 
Rose to as Many as 828 Million in 2021.”
20.   FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO, “The State of Food Security 
and Nutrition in the World,” 10.
21.   Ibid. 30.22.   Gilchrist, “IMF Slashes Global GDP Forecast as Economic Outlook 
Grows ‘Gloomy and More Uncertain.”
23.   Husain, “The Ukraine War Is Deepening Global Food Insecurity- 
What Can Be Done?” 
24.   Georgieva and Pazarbasioglu, “The G20 Common Framework for 
Debt Treatments Must Be Stepped Up.” 
25.   Husain, “The Ukraine War Is Deepening Global Food Insecurity- 
What Can Be Done?”
26.   World Bank Group,  Global Economic Prospects , 5.
27.   International Labour Organization, World Employment and Social 
Outlook: Trends , 13.
28.   Valuch and Hamuľák, “Use of Force in Cyberspace.”
29.   Zwitter, “Big Data and International Relations.”
30.   Li, “Who Will Govern the Metaverse?”
31.   Ibid.
32.   The Visual Journalism Team, “Ukraine war in maps: Tracking the 
Russian invasion”; Malyarenko, and Wolff, “Ukraine war: why Moscow 
could go nuclear over Kyiv’s ‘threats’ to Crimea.”
33.   Tannenwald, “Is Using Nuclear Weapons Still Taboo?”; United 
Nations, “UN Chief Disappointed Nuclear Treaty Conference Ends 
Without Consensus.” 
II. From Rethinking to Reforming: Conceptual 
Innovations and their Operationalization
34.   Johnson Sirleaf, “A Voice for Freedom!”
35.   World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Com -
mon Future . 
36.   United Nations, “Human Development Report 1994.”
37.   International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty, 
The Responsibility to Protect ; Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, “International Norms under Pressure: State Compliance 
with International Humanitarian & Human Rights Law” ; Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, “Priority #2: International Norms 
- International Strategy to Better Protect the Financial System against 
Cyber Threats.”
38.   Commission on Global Security, Justice & Governance, Confront -
ing the Crisis of Global Governance ; Guterres, “Tackling the Inequality 
Pandemic: A New Social Contract for a New Era”; Haas et al., “Crisis in 
Global Governance” ; Brunnée, “Multilateralism in Crisis.”
39.   Bollyky and Brown, “The Tragedy of Vaccine Nationalism: Only 
Cooperation Can End the Pandemic.”
40.   United Nations General Assembly, “Declaration on the Commem -
oration of the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the United Nations,”  2.
41.   Guterres, “Tackling the Inequality Pandemic: A New Social Con -
tract for a New Era.”
42.   Ponzio et. al., Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the 
Future , 21.
43.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda, 48.
44.   Note also how the term “(new) deal” is used in different countries 
and regions for large-scale sustainability projects. Doha Forum and 
Stimson Center, Building Back Together and Greener: Twenty Initiatives 
for a Just, Healthy, and Sustainable Global Recovery , 19-27.
45.    Guterres, Our Common Agenda, 14. 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 61
46.   Guterres, “Tackling the Inequality Pandemic: A New Social Con -
tract for a New Era.”
47.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda, 22 and 68.
48.   Ibid. 77.
49.   Ibid. 48.
50.   Pohle, “The Internet as a Global Good: UNESCO’s Attempt to 
Negotiate an International Framework for Universal Access to Cyber -
space.”
51.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  27.
52.   Ibid. 48 and 50.
53.   Kaul, Grunberg,and Stern, “Defining Global Public Goods.”
54.   Bodanksy, “What’s in a Concept? Global Public Goods, Interna -
tional Law, and Legitimacy.”
55.  Guterres, Our Common Agenda, 48.
56.   Ibid. 17.
57.   Kaul, Grunberg, and Stern, “Defining Global Public Goods,” 2.
58.   World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Com -
mon Future , 1.
59.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  59.
60.   Ibid. 22.
61.   Ibid.
62.   Doha Forum and Stimson Center, Coping with New and Old Crises: 
Global and Regional Cooperation in an Age of Uncertainty .  
63.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  14.
64.   Ibid. 22.
65.   Ibid. 48.
66.   Watene, “Reimagining the Human-Environment Relationship: 
Indigenous Philosophy and Intergenerational Justice.”
67.   United Nations General Assembly, The human right to a clean, 
healthy and sustainable environment .
68.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  17.
69.   The concept of “dead hand of the past” stems from constitution -
al theory but can be equally applied to the idea of the, more broadly 
defined, social contracts. Raz, “On the Authority and Interpretation of 
Constitutions: Some Preliminaries,”  164-69.
70.   Farry, “An Old Problem in the New Normal: The Digital Divide.”
71.   Feldstein, “Why Internet Access Is a Human Right”; Guterres, Our 
Common Agenda , 33.
72.   Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights holds that 
“everyone has the right . . . to seek, receive and impart information and 
ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.”
73.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda, 22.
74.   Ibid. 73.
75.   Guterres, “Inclusive, Networked Multilateralism Vital for Better 
World Governance, Says Secretary-General, at General Assembly’s 
Seventy-Fifth Anniversary Meeting.”
76.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  66.
77.   Ibid. 68.
78.   Weiss et. al., “The ‘Third’ United Nations”; Magnoni, “Global 
Partnerships Are Only as Strong as Their Diversity.”79.   Ponzio et. al., Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the 
Future,  24.
80.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda, 68
81.   Doha Forum and Stimson Center, Reimagining Governance in a 
Multipolar World , 19-21.
82.   United Nations, Shaping Our Future Together: Concluding Report of 
the UN75 Office.  
83.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  59.
84.   Ibid. 61.
85.   Ibid. 60.
86.   Doha Forum and Stimson Center, Coping with New and Old Crises: 
Global and Regional Cooperation in an Age of Uncertainty ; Ponzio et. al., Road 
to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the Future ; Wright, “Advanc -
ing Multilateralism in a Populist Age”; Overseas Development Institute,   
“Reimagining Multilateralism: Seizing the Opportunity for Change.”
III. Representing Succeeding Generations through  
a Declaration on Future Generations
87.  Lyons, “Seven Generations - the Role of Chief.”
88.   UNESCO, Declaration on the Responsibilities of the Present Genera -
tions Towards Future Generations.  
89.   UN and DESA, World Population Prospects .
90.   Kingdon, “Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies,” 19-205; and 
Zaller, The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion , Ch. 3.
91.   Wieke et al., “Governing long-term policy problems,” 255-278.
92.   See the examples of the Hungarian ombudsperson for Future Gen -
erations which was demoted to deputy ombudsperson four years after 
establishing the position, and the Israeli Future Generations Commis -
sion which only lasted from 2001-2006. Vaskor, “The Hungarian om -
budsman was downgraded by his foreign colleagues.” For an unpacking 
of the idea of political will, see Perell, “Bridging the ‘Political Will’ Gap.”
93.   UNICEF, “The Climate Crisis is a Child Rights Crisis,”  The Chil -
dren’s Climate Risk Index , 10.
94.   United Nations, The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2022 , 60-63.
95.   Stewart, “Horizontal Inequalities: Explaining Persistence and 
Change.”
96.   Next Generation Fellows,  Our Future Agenda . 
97.   The 2021 Global Commons Stewardship (GCS) Index, assesses 
both countries’ domestic impacts on the Global Commons and the 
impacts embodied in trade and consumption (so-called “international 
spillovers”). Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), 
Global Commons Stewardship Index 2021 , 23. 
98.   UNESCO, Declaration on the Responsibilities of the Present Genera -
tions Towards Future Generations.
99.   Guterres,  Our Common Agenda,  24.
100.  Ombudsman for Future Generations, “Appendix 1: Introduction 
of the Hungarian Ombudsman for Future Generations.”
101.  Dolmans and Preston, “Dutch Court Orders Shell to Reduce Emis -
sions in First Climate Change Ruling Against Company.”
102.  Department for Natural Resources of the Welsh Government, 
“Well-being of Future Generations (Wales) Act”; World Commission 
on Environment and Development, Our Common Future .
103.  United Nations, Disaster Risk Reduction Programme .
104.  Barbados Office of the Prime Minister, “FutureBARBADOS.”
105.  UNDP, RBAP Foresight Playboo k; Shalev, “Japan’s movement of 
Future Design councils.”
62
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 106.  Krznaric, “To Safeguard Future Generations”; Saijo, “Future 
Design.”
107.  Watene, “Reimagining the Human and Environment Relationship.”
108.  Ponzio et. al. Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for 
The Future .
109.  Kaul et al., Global Public Goods: International Cooperation in the  
21st Century .
110.  Guterres, Our Common Agend a, 50.
111.  For a further discussion on the notion of legacy at the heart of 
policymaking, see Perell and Yusuf, “What Kind of Ancestors Do We 
Wish to Be?”
112.  Colombia Supreme Court, Future Generations v. Ministry of the 
Environment and Other s.
113.  United Nations General Assembly, The human right to a clean, 
healthy and sustainable environment .
114.  Knappe et al., The politics of making and unmaking (sustainable) 
futures: introduction to the special feature .
115.  UNDP, RBAP Foresight Playbook , 43.
116.  Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 45.
117.  In a report from the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform 
on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services’ (IPBES) released on July 11, 
2022, the authors detail the dangers of policymaking that prioritizes 
short-term profit and thereby undervalues nature. The report calls for 
infusing Indigenous logic into policymaking, which is seen as a path 
to creating more inclusive, just policies which can enable sustainable 
livelihoods without degrading nature in the process. Pascual et al., 
“Summary for policymakers.”
118.  Government of Barbados, Barbados 2021 Update of the First Nation -
ally Determined Contributions .
119.  Centre for Strategic Futures, Foresight .
120.   Guterres, António. Our Common Agenda , 45. 
121.   Ibid. 66. 
122.   McQuilkin, “Doing Justice to the Future: A global index of inter -
generational solidarity derived from national statistics”; Krznaric, The 
Good Ancestor: A Radical Prescription for Long-term Thinking .
123.   The relationship between the independently mandated Office 
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights which supports the 
UNHRC and other UN human rights work is described in the first four 
paragraphs of the following document and may provide additional 
insight on an operational model for system-wide Future Generations 
advocacy; OHCHR, The Human Rights Council and the role of the Office of 
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 
124.   The Network is a joint initiative bringing together domestic initia -
tives from Finland, Germany, Canada, Wales, Israel, Norway, Hungary, 
and Australia. Network of Institutions for Future Generations, About . 
125.   Including for example, the Commission for Social Develop -
ment, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Commission on 
Population and Development, the United Nation Permanent Forum on 
Indigenous Issues, the High-Level Political Forum, the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Conference of the 
Parties, the United Nations University, the United Nations Research 
Institute for Social Development, the United Nations Academic Impact 
initiative, and United Nations Institute for Training and Research. 
IV. Facilitating an Open, Free, and Secure Digital Future 
for all through a Global Digital Compact 
126.   Ma, “Jack Ma discusses the Power of 30.” 
127.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 63.
128.   Guterres, Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.129.  ACM Conferences, “Algorithmic Bias: Proceedings of the 22nd 
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining.”
130.   Hill, “Wrongfully Accused by an Algorithm.”  
131.   This point is not addressed in the proposal of a Global Digital 
Compact as part of the Our Common Agenda  report. Niarchos, “The 
Dark Side of Congo’s Cobalt Rush”; Mistreanu, “Study Links Nike, 
Adidas and Apple to Forced Uighur Labor.”
132.   If an individual has to spend more than 10 percent of their dispos -
able income on a minimum quality and quantity of internet services, 
they may be considered internet poor. Bogdan-Martin, “Measuring 
Digital Development: Facts & Figures 2019”;  Internet Poverty Index, 
“World Data Lab”;  Mohammed, “With Almost Half of World’s Popula -
tion Still Offline, Digital Divide Risks Becoming ‘New Face of Inequal -
ity’, Deputy Secretary-General Warns General Assembly”;  Fitchett, 
“The Digital Divide Is Getting Worse: It’s Time to Close It.”
133.   Platforms here refers to devices which connect to the Internet 
such as PCs, tablets, laptops, etc. Broadband Commission, “The Digital 
Transformation of Education: Connecting Schools, Empowering 
Learners.”
134.   Collins, “Why Net Neutrality Was Repealed and How It Affects 
You”; Pazzanese, “Ethical Concerns Mount as AI Takes Bigger Deci -
sion-Making Role.”
135.   The UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression 
defines disinformation as “false information that is disseminated 
intentionally to cause serious social harm, and misinformation as the 
dissemination of false information unknowingly.” UN Department 
of Global Communications, “5 ways the UN is fighting ‘infodemic’ of 
misinformation”; Romero and Jonathan, “Will the World Clean up 
‘Information Pollution’ in 2022?”; Behoteguy Cortes, “UN Combats 
Disinformation during Pandemic”; Sánchez, Colomina, and Youngs, 
The Impact of Disinformation on Democratic Processes and Human Rights .
136.   Del Vicario et al.,  The Spreading of Misinformation Online , 554-559; 
DeVos, “The Echo Chamber Effect: Social Media’s Role in Political 
Bias.”
137.   Hackett, “Cyberbullying and Its Implications for Human Rights.”
138.   Fay and Medhora, “Global Governance Framework for Digital 
Technologies,” 3.
139.   Vought, “Memorandum For The Heads Of Executive Departments 
And Agencies.”
140.   Dumanova and Oblin, “European Union: Has The Future 
Arrived? Overview Of The EU Draft Regulation On Artificial Intelli -
gence.”
141.   Matthews, “UK rejects EU approach to artificial intelligence in 
favour of ‘pro-innovation’ policy.” 
142.  Fay and Medhora, “Global Governance Framework for Digital 
Technologies,” 3.
143.   Ibid.
144.   Nguyen, “Digital Asean”; ITU, “Regional Initiatives and Projects/
Activities” ; Asian Development Bank, “Digitalization in These Six 
Sectors Can Boost Regional Cooperation in Central Asia.”
145.   Collins-Fattedad et al., “Towards a Global Digital Governance 
Architecture.”
146.   Indeed, the development of the GDC itself, as per the request 
of the Secretary-General, will be led by a collaboration of efforts 
between the Envoy on Technology, UNESCO, ODA, the ITU, and the 
President of the General Assembly, “Our Common Agenda Summary of 
the Thematic Consultations”; Fay and Medhora, “Global Governance 
Framework for Digital Technologies,” 3.
147.   Korea Digital Development Program, “Kodi.” 
148.   BAAI, “Beijing AI Principles.”
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 63
149.   G7, Charlevoix Common Vision For The Future Of Artificial Intelli -
gence . 
150.   World Bank, “World Bank Group Launches New Country Part -
nership Framework for the Gambia.”
151.   World Bank, “Digital Economy for Africa Initiative.”
152.   Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace, “Homepage.”
153.   Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency,  “Critical Infra -
structure Threat Information Sharing Framework.” 
154.   European Commission, “Questions and Answers: Digital Services 
Act.”
155.   The Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet 
Governance, “NETmundial Multistakeholder Statement.”
156.   United Nations,  “The Age of Digital Interdependence”;  Guterres, 
Roadmap for Digital Cooperation .
157.    Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 63.
158.   The segmentation of these topics was based on the OCA report, 
and the UN Office of the Special Envoy on Technology’s website 
classification. 
159.   Skoog, “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common Agen -
da.”
160.   Ibid.
161.   Amb. De la Fuente Ramírez, “Our Common Agenda Discussion 
Series: Global Digital Compact.”
162.   Internet Governance Forum, “Three Possible Architectures for 
Global Digital Cooperation.” 
163.   Joint Statement Finland, Mexico, Colombia, Denmark, Fiji, 
Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Namibia, the 
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Switzerland, Singapore, “Statement at 
General Assembly on Our Common Agenda”; Jürgenson, “Statement at 
General Assembly on Our Common Agenda.”
164.   Yu Ping Chan, “Our Common Agenda Discussion Series: Global 
Digital Compact.”
165.   These principles can be based on existing human rights in -
struments, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (IC -
ESCR) and Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimina -
tion against Women (CEDAW).
166.   BSA The Software Alliance,  “Comparing International 
Frameworks for the Development of Responsible AI - BSA Artificial 
Intelligence.” 
167.   Government of Italy, “Strategic Programme on Artificial Intelli -
gence, 2022-2024.”
168.   The United States Securities and Exchange Commission’s recent 
press release on enhanced disclosure requirements for ESGs can serve 
as an example of disclosure requirements for sustainability - partic -
ularly with regards to greenhouse gas emissions, U.S Securities and 
Exchange Commission, “SEC Proposes to Enhance Disclosures by 
Certain Investment Advisers and Investment Companies about ESG 
Investment Practices.”
169.   University Of Auckland, “Digital Sustainability Index.”
170.   International Labour Organization, “Introduction to Internation -
al Labour Standards.”
171.   Llovio, “Blacks and Hispanics More Likely to Lack Access to Inter -
net and Technology, Study Finds.” 
172.   Wadhwa and Salkever, “How Elon Musk’s Starlink Got Bat -
tle-Tested in Ukraine.” 173.   Drake, “Will Spacex’s Starlink Satellites Harm Astronomy? Here’s 
What We Know.”
174.   Guterres, Roadmap for Digital Cooperation .
175.   Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, “Strengthening Cyber Capaci -
ty and Expertise Globally through International Collaboration.”
176.   Claesson, “Coming Together to Fight Fake News: Lessons from 
the European Approach to Disinformation.” 
177.   West, “How to Combat Fake News and Disinformation.”
178.   Husseini, “UK to Strengthen Internet Laws to Fight Russian 
Disinformation.”
179.   Davis, Esposito, and Signé, “‘Agile governance’ could redesign 
policy on data protection. Here’s why that matters.”
180.   BSA The Software Alliance, “Social Principles of Human-Centric 
AI,” 11.
181.   Rahnama and Pentland, “The New Rules of Data Privacy.”
182.   Russia, for instance, noted during the PGA OCA Dialogues (see 
Annex 1) the need to “prevent any blurring of the foundations of the 
State sovereignty and the exclusive right of UN Member States to 
participate in the decision-making process.”
V. Advancing Inclusive and Just Peace through New 
Agenda For Peace
183.   Pearson, “Lester B. Pearson Nobel Peace Prize Speech.”
184.   Hsiang, Meng and Cane, “Civil conflicts are associated with the 
global climate,” 438-441; Seragaldin, “Water: conflicts set to arise 
within as well as between states”; Alliance for Peacebuilding, “Con -
flict-Climate Integration Policy Brief”; Hume, and Zuroski, “The Cli -
mate Change Crisis: Ensuring Integration of Conflict Prevention and 
Climate Change in U.S. Foreign Policy and Development Assistance.”
185.   Abdenur, “Closing the Governance Gap in Climate, Security, and 
Peacebuilding.” 
186.    Derviş and Strauss, “Global Governance after COVID-19: Survey 
Report.” 
187.   UN-Water,  “Water Scarcity.” 
188.   Aamer and White,  “Water Security in the Himalayan Region.”; 
Ho, “The China–India Water Dispute.” 
189.   Climate Diplomacy, “Turkey, Syria and Iraq: Conflict over the 
Euphrates-Tigris.”
190.   King, “Water Stress: A Triple Threat in Nigeria” ; Water, Peace 
and Security, “Mali.” 
191.   Zaveri et al., “Ebb and Flow.”
192.   Wendle, “Syria’s climate refugees,” 54. 
193.   SonicWall,  “2022 SonicWall Cyber Threat Report.”  
194.   Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty, “Cyber Attacks on Critical 
Infrastructure.” 
195.   Liff, “Cyberwar: a new ‘absolute weapon’?” 400.
196.   As per OCA, the global commons “refer to natural or cultural 
resources that are shared by and benefit us all” and include the high 
seas, atmosphere, Antarctica, and outer space as areas beyond national 
jurisdiction. Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 61.
197.   Kennedy, “Environmental Scarcity and the Outbreak of Conflict.”  
198.   Thompson, “The Sustainable Exploitation of the Ocean’s Miner -
als and Resources.”
199.   Lovgren, “Many freshwater fish have declined by 76 percent in 
less than 50 years”; IUCN, “One-Third of Freshwater Fish Face Extinc -
tion, Warns New Report.” 
64
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 200.   Tharoor, “How Somalia’s Fishermen became Pirates.” 
201.   The Nuclear Threat Initiative, “Paros Treaty”; Boothby, “Space 
Weapons and the Law”; Zhao, Yun, and Shengli Jiang, “Armed conflict 
in outer space,”  50-59.
202.   Paikowsky, “Why Russia tested its Anti-satellite weapon.” 
203.   International Labour Organization, “Global Employment Trends 
for Youth 2020.”
204.   Bertozzi, “Youth Policies and Youth Participation: From Benefi -
ciaries to Actors.”
205.   Bhabha et al., “Shelter from the Storm.”
206.   “Between 1992 and 2019, women were, on average, just 13 per 
cent of negotiators, 6 percent of mediators, and 6 percent of signatories 
in major peace processes worldwide. About seven out of every ten 
peace processes did not include any women mediators or women signa -
tories” United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on women peace 
and security;  Banjo, “The Women, Peace and Security Agenda Is Not 
Yielding Results, Diplomats Say.”  
207.   United Nations, “Perpetrators of Sexual Violence in Armed Con -
flict Must Be Brought to Justice”; Amnesty International, “Ethiopia: 
Troops and Militia Rape, Abduct Women and Girls in Tigray Conflict.”
208.   Guterres, Supplement to an Agenda for Peace: position paper of the 
Secretary-General on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the United 
Nations .
209.   United Nations General Assembly and Security Council,  Report of 
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations.
210.   United Nations, Report of High-Level Independent Panel on UN 
Peace Operations .
211.   United Nations, Report of the Advisory Group of Experts for the 2015 
Review of the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture.  
212.   “Conflicts are also longer and more intractable: between 1989 and 
2018, nearly half of all conflicts recurred. More than 90% of recurring 
conflicts concern the same or similar grievances, highlighting the 
failure of peacebuilding efforts to address root causes.” International 
Institute for Strategic Studies, The Armed Conflict Survey 2021,   23.
213.   Le Roux, “Pro-Russian Facebook Assets in Mali Coordinated 
Support for Wagner Group, Anti-Democracy Protests.” 
214.   Detsch, “Russia Is Readying the Zinc Coffins Again”; Pettersson 
et al., “Organized Violence 1989–2020, with a Special Emphasis on 
Syria.”
215.   Petcu and Ponzio, “The UN-75 Commitment, A Daring Commit -
ment for a More Perfect World”; Hove, “Pathetic: The US Pulls the Plug 
on a UN Global Cease-Fire Resolution.” 
216.   United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, “Figures at a 
Glance .”
217.   Independent Commission on Multilateralism, Report of the 
Independent Commission on Multilateralism, Pulling Together: The Multi -
lateral System and Its Future.
218.   Bellinger, “How Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine Violates Interna -
tional Law.” 
219.   Nichols, “Russia, China Veto Syria Aid via Turkey for Second 
Time This Week.” 
220.   Lederer, “US Says It Opposes UN Resolution Calling for Gaza 
Cease-fire.”  
221.   Hearn et al., “The United Nations ‘Peacebuilding Architecture’: 
Past, Present and Future.” 
222.   United Nations, “Secretary-General, Addressing Peacebuilding 
Commission, Says New Agenda for Peace Is Our Platform to Update 
Promise of Saving Future Generations from War.” 223.   United Nations, “Cooperation between United Nations, Regional 
Blocs.” 
224.   United Nations, “Secretary-General’s Remarks at the Meeting of 
the Peacebuilding Commission: ‘Our Common Agenda and the New 
Agenda for Peace’ [as Delivered]”; United Nations, “Secretary-General, 
Addressing Peacebuilding Commission, Says New Agenda for Peace ‘Is 
Our Platform to Update Promise’ of Saving Future Generations from 
War”; Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 61.
225.   Ponzio, et al.,  Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for 
the Future , 26. 
226.   United Nations Secretary-General, “Secretary-General’s 
High-Level Advisory Board on Mediation.”
227.   Gul, “Qatar to Host International Meetings on Afghan Peace.”
228.   Lynfield, “Israel’s Rewarding Road to Normalization.”
229.   Day and Caus, “Conflict Prevention in an Era of Climate Change: 
Adapting the UN to Climate-Security Risks.” 
230.   UNDPPA, “Peace and Development Advisors - Joint UNDP-DPPA 
Programme on Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention.”
231.   Einsiedel, “What Works in UN Resident Coordinator-Led Conflict 
Prevention: Lessons from the Field,” 5. 
232.   Herrberg, Packer, and Varela, “The Evolution of the United 
Nations Standby Team of Mediation Experts in Context Key Trends, 
Issues and Recommendations,” 52-53. See Recommendation 4 of 
Einsiedel, “What Works in UN Resident Coordinator-Led Conflict 
Prevention: Lessons from the Field,” 54:  “It is considered of added 
value by many interlocutors, pro-actively to provide the expertise 
of SBT members also in these contexts: i.e., for conflict analysis, 
organization of mediation workshops, and working with Peace and 
Development Advisors on specific topics, working with local part -
ners and simply being present for proactive advice during periods of 
growing tension and instability.”
233.   Interview with Daisaku Higashi, Professor, Center for Global 
Education and Discovery at Sophia University in Tokyo, July 28, 2022.
234.   Commission on Global Security, Justice & Governance, Confront -
ing the Crisis of Global Governance , 33. 
235.   See Bellamy, “Conflict Prevention and the Responsibility to Pro -
tect,” 135-156; and Ponzio et al., An Innovation Agenda for UN 75 , 24.
236.   Charter of the United Nations, Article 99: “The Secre -
tary-General may bring to the attention of the Security Council 
any matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of 
international peace and security.”See also Donaldson, “Liechten -
stein’s Veto Initiative.” 
237.   Ponzio and Mani, “Peaceful Settlement of Disputes and Conflict 
Prevention,” 9-10. 
238.   Ponzio et al., Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for 
the Future,  32-33. 
239.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 77. 
240.   Ibid. 59-60. 
241.   Global Governance Innovation Network,“Global Policy Dialogue 
on Evidence-Based Solutions and the Road to 2023: Strengthening Hu -
man Rights, Humanitarian Action, Sustainable Trade & Disarmament 
Cooperation,” 10. 
242.   The Global Water Forum defines hydro-diplomacy as “the use 
of diplomatic instruments to existing or emerging disagreements and 
conflicts over shared water resources with the aim to solve or mitigate 
those for the sake of cooperation, regional stability, and peace.” Global 
Water Forum, “What is Water Diplomacy and Why Should You Care?” 
243.   United Nations, Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational 
Uses of International Watercourses . 
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 65
244.    World Bank Group, “Fact Sheet: The Indus Waters Treaty 1960 
and the Role of the World Bank.”
245.   Komara, “Setting the example for Cooperative Management of 
Transboundary Water Resources in West Africa.”
246.   Talihärm, “Towards Cyberpeace.” 
247.   Rudnick and Guat, “What the Digital Geneva Convention 
Means.” 
248.   United Nations. General Assembly, “Secretary-General’s Road -
map for Digital Cooperation,” 16. 
249.   United Nations, Convention on the Law of the Sea . 
250.   UNEP, Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone 
Layer.
251.   United Nations, Antarctic Treaty . 
252.   United Nations, Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of 
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space.  
253.   Higgins-Bloom, “Food Fight.”
254.   United Nations. General Assembly, “Transforming our world: the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,” 23-24. 
255.   Mukherjee, “Space Debris: How Dangerous Is It and Where Does 
It Come From?”
256.   Di Pippo, “Access to Space for All”; and United Nations Office for 
Outer Space Affairs, “Access to Space for All.”
257.   Goal 16 on “Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions” of the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals; United Nations, Declaration 
on the Commemoration of the Seventy Fifth Anniversary of the United 
Nations.
258.   “Positive Peace is defined as the attitudes, institutions and struc -
tures that create and sustain peaceful societies. The same factors that 
create lasting peace also lead to many other positive outcomes that 
societies aspire to, including: thriving economies,  better performance 
on ecological measures, and high levels of resilience and adaptability 
to change.” Institute for Economics & Peace, Positive Peace Report 2020: 
Analyzing the Factors That Sustain Peace , 4. 
259.   United Nations Security Council, “Resolution 1325 on Women 
Peace and Security.” 
260.    Huber, “The Impact of Women Peacekeepers on Public Support 
for Peacekeeping in Troop- Contributing Countries,” 3. 
261.   UN Women, “Gender-Inclusive Peace Processes: Strengthening 
Women’s Meaningful Participation in Peace Processes”; UN Women, 
“Global Convening on Gender-Inclusive Peace Processes: Strength -
ening Women’s Meaningful Participation through Constituency 
Building.” 
262.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  66.
263.   United Nations Security Council, “Disproportionately Affected 
Youth Must Be Central to COVID-19 Pandemic Recovery Plans, Ex -
perts Tell Security Council, Stressing Their Key Role as Game-Chang -
ers.” 
264.   Simpson, “Independent Progress Study on Youth, Peace, and 
Security,” 30; Podder et al., “Youth, Peace and Programming for 
Change,” 6. 
265.   United Network of Young Peacebuilders and Search for Common 
Ground, “Translating Youth, Peace & Security Policy into Practice,” 27. 
266.   Interview with Saji Prelis, Director, Children & Youth programs, 
Search for Common Ground, June 29, 2022. 
267.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda,  39-40. 
268.   United Nations, Youth Strategy 2030: Working with and for Young 
People.269.   United Nations Peacebuilding, Youth, Peace and Security  - A 
Programming Handbook ; United Nations Security Council, Resolution 
2250.
270.   “Evidence from the OECD Youth Governance Surveys shows 
that, across six OECD countries, the share of the budget of the gov -
ernment entity in charge of youth affairs dedicated to the youth work 
sector has shrunk from 7% in 2015 to 4% in 2019.” OECD, Governance 
for Youth, Trust and Intergenerational Justice , 95-96.
271.   OECD, Governance for Youth, Trust and Intergenerational Justice , 
77-79. 
272.   Ponzio, et al., Road to 2023 , 42. United Nations Major Group 
for Children and Youth, Principles and Barriers for Meaningful Youth 
Engagement at the United Nations . 
273.   These efforts include the Intergovernmental Negotiations on Se -
curity Council Reform, the Ad-Hoc Working Group on the Revitaliza -
tion of the General Assembly, and the UN Peacebuilding Architecture 
Review. 
274.   United Nations General Assembly, A More Secure World: Our 
Shared Responsibility . 
275.   United Nations, “General Assembly Overwhelmingly Adopts Res -
olution Demanding Russian Federation Immediately End Illegal Use of 
Force in Ukraine, Withdraw All Troops.” 
276.   United Nations General Assembly, “Standing Mandate for a Gen -
eral Assembly Debate When a Veto is Cast in the Security Council.” 
277.   Carswell, “Unblocking the UN Security Council: The Uniting for 
Peace Resolution.”
278.   Center on International Cooperation, “The Secretary-General’s 
Proposal for Assessed Contributions for the Peacebuilding Fund: An 
Explainer”; United Nations. General Assembly and Security Council,  
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace , 16. 
279.   For the UN Secretary-General’s thinking on an Emergency Plat -
form, see:  Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 65. For the Stimson Center’s 
further development of the Emergency Platform concept, see Ponzio et 
al., Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the Future , 34-35.
280.   International Monetary Fund,  “World Economic Outlook Up -
date, July 2022: Gloomy and More Uncertain.”
VI. Road to the Summit of the Future
281.   Basu, “World Future Council offers support to UN Summit of the 
Future 2023.”
282.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda , 66.  
283.   Ponzio and Zhang, Here Are the Next Steps the US Should Take to 
Re-Engage With the UN .
284.   United Nations General Assembly, Resolution on the Follow-up to 
the Report of the Secretary-General Entitled “Our Common Agenda.”
285.   Conclusion reached based on interviews by Richard Ponzio with 
multiple UN Permanent Representatives in April and July of 2022 in 
New York.
286.   Ponzio et al., Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for 
the Future , 66-67.
287.   President of the General Assembly, Our Common Agenda, Summa -
ry of Thematic Consultations . 
288.   United Nations General Assembly, “Follow-up to the report of 
the Secretary-General entitled ‘Our Common Agenda’.”
66
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 289.   In his August 4, 2022 Our Common Agenda briefing to Mem -
ber States, UN Secretary-General Guterres described the proposed 
Summit of the Future and the second SDG Summit in 2023 as “twin 
summits” that share the common objective of “creat[ing] conditions 
for a sustainable, equitable and inclusive future … the ‘twin summits’ 
are our last, best chance to deliver on … a multilateral system that 
manages and solves global challenges in a timely, effective and fair way 
…” Guterres, “Briefing by the Secretary-General on the progress on 
‘Our Common Agenda’.”
290.   United Nations General Assembly, 2005 World Summit Outcome .
291.   International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Update July 
2022: Gloomy and More Uncertain .
292.   United Nations General Assembly, Briefing to Member States on the 
Declaration on Future Generations .
293.   Ibid.
294.   United Nations General Assembly, “First Informal Consultations 
on July 7th, 2022.”
295.   United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Ministeri -
al Declaration of the Group of 77 and China to UNCTAD XV. 
296.   Guterres, “Briefing by the Secretary-General on the progress on 
‘Our Common Agenda’.”
297.    United Nations, “The Age of Digital Interdependence.”
298.   Guterres, Our Common Agenda . 
299.    Minale, “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common Agenda.” 
300.   United Nations, “At ‘Our Common Agenda’ Talks, Secre -
tary-General Says Summits on Future, Sustainable Development Goals 
‘Last, Best Chance’ to Manage, Solve Global Challenges.”
301.   President of the General Assembly, Our Common Agenda, Summa -
ry of Thematic Consultations .
302.   Guterres, “Secretary-General’s remarks to the General Assembly 
Consultation on ‘Our Common Agenda’.”
303.   United Nations, “From Words to Action: A Global Ceasefire 
Beyond COVID-19 Pandemic.”
304.   EU, UK - thematic consultations.
305.   African Group and Egypt in the thematic consultations.
306.    United Nations, Shaping Our Future Together: Concluding Report 
of the UN75 Office.
307.   United Nations UN75 Office, Resolved to Combine Our Efforts: 
Preliminary Assessment of the UN75 Survey and Dialogues . 
308.   The twelve priority areas were planet, conflict, law and justice, 
women and girls, building trust, digital cooperation, upgrading the 
UN, sustainable financing, partnerships, youth, and preparedness. 
United Nations General Assembly, Declaration on the Commemoration of 
the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations.
309.   United Nations  General Assembly,  2005 World Summit Outcome.
310.  United Nations The Future We Want, The United Nations We Need.  
Annex 1.1: Illustrative Tracking of Highlights in Our 
Common Agenda  Follow-Up Negotiations Concerning 
Future Generations
311.   United Nations General Assembly, “Common Agenda consulta -
tion 4: Protecting our planet and being prepared for the future.”
312.   United Nations General Assembly, “Briefing to Member States on 
the Declaration on Future Generations.” 
313.   United Nations General Assembly, First Informal Consultation by 
Co-Facilitators for the Development of an Elements’ Paper on the Declara -
tion on Future Generations.314.   United Nations General Assembly, Stakeholder Consultation on the 
Formulation of an Elements Paper on the Declaration on Future Generations . 
315.   United Nations General Assembly, “Briefing by the Secre -
tary-General on the progress of “Our Common Agenda’.”
Annex 1.2: Member States’ contributions during the PGA 
Thematic Consultations on the Global Digital Compact 
(February 21, 2022).
316.   Kloss, “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common Agenda.”
317.   Jürgenson,“Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.”
318.   Minale, “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.” 
319.   Skoog,  “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common Agen -
da.”
320.   Russian Federation, “Statement at General Assembly on Our 
Common Agenda.”
321.   Joint Statement Finland, Mexico, Colombia, Denmark, Fiji, 
Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Namibia, the 
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Switzerland, Singapore, “Statement at 
General Assembly on Our Common Agenda.”
322.   United States, “Statement at General Assembly on Our Com -
mon Agenda.” 
Annex 1.3: Member States’ contributions during the PGA 
Thematic Consultations on the New Agenda for Peace 
(February 21, 2022). 
323.   Canada, Australia and New Zealand (CANZ), “Statement at  Our 
Common Agenda Informal Thematic Consultation on the 3rd Thematic 
Cluster: “Frameworks for a Peaceful World – Promoting Peace, Inter -
national Law and Digital Cooperation.”
324.   Wallace, “Statement at  Our Common Agenda Informal Thematic 
Consultation on the 3rd Thematic Cluster: “Frameworks for a Peaceful 
World – Promoting Peace, International Law and Digital Cooperation.”
325.   China, “China’s Intervention at the Thematic Consultation 3 on 
“Our Common Agenda.”
326.   Skoog,  “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.” 
327.   Ishikane, “Statement at  Our Common Agenda Informal The -
matic Consultation on the 3rd Thematic Cluster: “Frameworks for 
a Peaceful World – Promoting Peace, International Law and Digital 
Cooperation.”
328.   Joint Statement Finland, Mexico, Colombia, Denmark, Fiji, 
Indonesia, Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Namibia, the 
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Switzerland, Singapore, “Statement at 
General Assembly on Our Common Agenda.”
329.   Norway, “Statement at  Our Common Agenda Informal Thematic 
Consultation on the 3rd Thematic Cluster: Frameworks for a Peaceful 
World – Promoting Peace, International Law and Digital Cooperation.”
330.   United Kingdom, “Statement at  Our Common Agenda Informal 
Thematic Consultation on the 3rd Thematic Cluster: Frameworks for 
a Peaceful World – Promoting Peace, International Law and Digital 
Cooperation.”
331.   Joyini, “Statement at  Our Common Agenda Informal Thematic 
Consultation on the 3rd Thematic Cluster: Frameworks for a Peaceful 
World – Promoting Peace, International Law and Digital Cooperation.”
332.   Bae, “Statement at  Our Common Agenda Informal Thematic 
Consultation on the 3rd Thematic Cluster: Frameworks for a Peaceful 
World – Promoting Peace, International Law and Digital Cooperation.”
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 67Annex 1: Illustrations of Our Common 
Agenda Follow-up Discussions
Annex 1.1: Illustrative Highlights from Our Common Agenda  
Follow-Up Negotiations on Future Generations
MEETING SUMMARY OF ILLUSTRATIVE REMARKS
PGA Thematic 
Consultations 
Fourth Cluster
(March 3, 2022.)311G77
• The Group believes that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is the agreed frame -
work for safeguarding the prosperity of both current and future generations.
• Creation of forums and processes to protect the interests of future generations should 
avoid overlapping of mandates.
• Requested clarification on the inter-operability of “Proposed Futures Labs” and the “Office 
of Special Envoy for Future Generations” as well as on the proposed mandate of the Special 
Envoy’s Office.
• Emphasizes the primacy of existing multilateral framework for cooperation on Climate 
Change, namely United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and 
its Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement.
EU
• Welcomed the proposals for a “Futures Lab” and a Strategic Foresight and Global Risk 
Report.
• Noted that the proposal for a Special Envoy for Future Generations deserves positive 
consideration as they could play a key role in preparing the proposed “Declaration on Future 
Generations” as one of the deliverables for the Summit of the Future.
Africa Group
• Emphasized the important need for prior coordination with Member States in this regard.
• Noted that we need to be mindful of to not duplicate structures and institutions, and 
stressed that the interests of future generations should be embedded within policymaking  
at the national levels.
• The Group further emphasized the primary role Member States have in data collection and 
conducting forecasts regarding the future.
Pacific Islands Forum
• Stressed the adaption and territorial threats of climate change, conserving biodiversity and 
oceans, preparing global vaccination plan, and ensuring pandemic preparedness. 
Summary of 
Expert Briefings 
on the Declaration 
of Future 
Generations 
(June 30, 2022)312EU
• Highlighted that the human rights pillar is important in the present discussion and further 
pointed out the Human Rights Council resolution on right to a healthy environment.
EOSG
• Suggested establishing an alternative platform for institutional follow-up on the Declaration of 
Future Generations, along with the appointment of the Special Envoy for Future Generations.
• Suggested establishing a mechanism either under General Assembly, or the repurposing 
Trusteeship Council; to consider and act on behalf of the Future Generations.
• Pointed out that the declaration shall seek inspiration from International Human Rights Law 
and strive for inclusive decision-making for pursuing the interests of future generations.
G77
• Noted that the elements of the declaration must be devised by the Member States and 
urged states to look for common priorities through discussions with the G77 .
Indonesia, Pakistan, Egypt and Iran
• Emphasized the importance of 2030 Agenda, and its alignment with the declaration. 
68
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY First Informal 
Consultations 
(July 7, 2022)313EU
• Emphasized the importance of clean, healthy, and sustainable environment, along with quality 
education, enhance multistakeholder engagement especially meaningful participation of youth.
• Considered priority elements for the declaration especially - accountability for violation 
of Human Rights, focus on economic, social, and cultural rights, along with Agenda 2030, 
climate action, biodiversity, and increasing pollution.
Brazil
• Called for accelerating the implementation of Agenda 2030 and not to renegotiate outcome 
documents but build upon such instruments. Noted that Agenda 2030 includes commitments 
toward future generations thus the focus should be on fulfillment of agreed frameworks.
Pakistan
• Reflect priorities of South, bridging financial and technological gaps, ensure means for poor 
and most vulnerable.
• Pointed out that Agenda 2030 achieved through global consensus includes commitments for 
present and future generations, and provides sufficient safeguard along with Paris Agreement. 
Mexico
• Pointed toward specific elements for the consideration in the declaration such as adopting a 
youth inclusive approach, emphasis on the climate crisis, and support the digital transforma -
tion that calls for protection of Human Rights.
Stakeholder 
Engagement 
(July 22, 2022)314EOSG
• Called for renewing the social contract and delivering on global public goods.
G77
• Noted that commitments undertaken by the Member States should not be renegotiated, and 
measures for adequate financing, and technology sharing should be ensured.
C4UN
• Highlighted the well-being of future generations as a global public good and called for future 
generations inclusive national decision making.
• Noted the need to bring commitments in legal, political (accountability and transparency), 
and moral parlance.
Multistakeholder Experts
• Called for establishing the UN Special Envoy for Future Generations and enhancing its en -
gagement at regional and national levels through institutional networks.
• Highlighted the protection from, existential risks arising from climate change, engineered 
pandemic, bioweapons and advanced AI, as global public good.
Brazil
• Noted that climate element could not be isolated and other elements such as famine, pollu -
tion, debt sustainability and environmental protection should be a core focus.
Summary of 
Briefing by the 
Secretary General 
on the Our 
Common Agenda  
(August 4, 2022)315Fiji (Co-Facilitator)
• Elements paper for Declaration on Future Generations will capture elements proposed by the 
Member States and stakeholders, and it shall be consolidated by the first week of September 
and thereupon member state informal consultations will be held on the 9th of September.
Colombia
• The declaration shall focus on preventing future shocks and crises along with closing the 
digital divide and empowering women.
Senegal
• Called for avoiding duplicity of processes and making a Declaration on Future Generations a 
forward-looking agenda beyond 2030.
Mexico
• Human rights should be at the center of the Declaration on Future Generations that should 
address triple planetary threats.
Nicaragua
• A Declaration on Future Generations should reflect grievances of youth on environmental 
issues and unilateral coercive measures should be abolished.
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 69Summary of Elements Paper on the Declaration for Future Generations   
(September 9, 2022)
Key takeaways from the Elements Paper include the need to promote intergenerational equality 
through multiskateholder approaches, which could advance knowledge and policies designed to 
safeguard the well-being of future generations and mitigate existential risks. Operational mecha -
nisms proposed in the paper to protect future generations include the appointment of representa -
tives on behalf of future generations at all government levels and the creation of monitoring and 
reporting tools, such as the development of a knowledge base composed of intergenerational data 
and best practices that can be used to develop long-term strategies to address issues of planetary 
preservation, conflict prevention, effective digital governance, along with other matters that per -
tain to the well-being of future generations. As the interests of future generations are grounded in 
sustainable development, the paper recognizes the need for accelerated action on the SDGs to meet 
the needs of present and future generations, proposing the SOTF as an opportunity to commit to 
pathways that could safeguard the well-being of future generations. Finally, the paper recognizes 
the complementarity of a New Agenda for Peace and Global Digital Compact in advancing the 
goals of a Declaration on Future Generations. 
Mapping of Elements Paper with Rethinking Global Cooperation
ELEMENTS PAPER RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION
Asserts the need to promote the well-being 
of future generations (3).Promotes the well-being of future generations as a global public 
good (Section 3: Representing Succeeding Generations through a 
Declaration on Future Generations, Global Policy Framework, p. 27).
Integrating the needs and interests of future 
generations into legal frameworks (2).Declaration should be crafted in consideration of future generations’ 
legal rights (Section 3:Representing Succeeding Generations through 
a Declaration on Future Generations, Global Policy Framework, p. 27).
The social, political, and economic empow -
erment of women and girls functions as a 
multiplier for long-term development (3).The multiplier effect of existing horizontal inequalities today created 
through race, gender or ethnicity become vertical inequalities of 
tomorrow which impede upon long-term. (Section 3: Representing 
Succeeding Generations through a Declaration on Future Generations, 
The Multiplier Effect of Existing Inequalities and the Lack of Collective 
Global Responsibility, p. 23)
The 2030 agenda poses intergenerational 
relevance; achieving SDGs is inclusive of 
future generations (4).SDGs transpose across initiatives to safeguard future genera -
tions (Section 3: Representing Succeeding Generations through 
a Declaration on Future Generations, Youth, Agenda 2030, and 
Beyond , p. 29).
Look to existing best practices in national 
constitutions to inform international models 
(4).Examples of best practices at the national level from Whales, Hungary, 
and Barbados (Section 3: Representing Succeeding Generations 
through a Declaration on Future Generations, Some Best practices 
from national models, p. 25).
Development of monitoring and reporting 
mechanisms such as an Intergenerational 
Sustainability Index and Universal Periodic 
Review mechanism to measure member 
states’ abilities to provide for future gener -
ations (5).Development of a Future Generations Review and an Intergenerational 
Solidarity Index to measure member states’ abilities to provide for 
future gens (Section 3: Representing Succeeding Generations through 
a Declaration on Future Generations, A Council for Future Generations, 
A Future Generations Review, and an Intergenerational Solidarity Index 
p. 30-31).
Development of a Futures Lab to under -
stand the future risks and challenges that 
future generations face (5).Development of a Futures lab to promote exchange of best practices, 
knowledge, and strategic foresight mechanisms (Section 3: Repre -
senting Succeeding Generations through a Declaration on Future 
Generations, A Declaration on Future Generation, Realigning Political 
Incentives in Support of Future Citizenry, p. 28).
70
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY MEMBER STATES/
COALITIONSREMARKS 
Brazil Concerning a Global Digital Compact, however, more clarity is needed on the nature of this 
proposal, including its relation to the IGF and the UN system.316
Estonia Affordable, meaningful connectivity and digital inclusion are essential in achieving SDGs. 
Estonia considers that the Secretary-General’s Roadmap on Digital Cooperation and the 
work done in its Roundtables can provide important inputs toward the Global Digital 
Compact.317
Ethiopia We would like caution against disruption of multilateral platforms due to undue ap -
proximation of issues to human rights. Unfortunately, human rights are one of the most 
politicized in international relations, also instrumentalized against states. We suggest the 
report to reconsider what is defined as “frontier issues” and their approximation to human 
rights.318
European Union The Global Digital Compact could serve to “turbo charge” the implementation of the 
SDGs and other areas. The round tables and the Secretary-General’s Roadmap on Digital 
Cooperation can form the technical backbone for principles and commitments, while a 
public “listening” exercise with true multistakeholder engagement could launch the reflec -
tion as to what the new compact should entail.319 
Russia We take note with interest of the UN Secretary-General’s initiative to develop a Global 
Digital Compact. It is necessary to emphasize that, along with the relevance of the involve -
ment in the rgos of non-governmental actors - the private sector and civil society - it is no 
less important to prevent any blurring of the foundations of the State sovereignty and the 
exclusive right of UN Member States to participate in the decision-making process.320 
Joint Statement 
Finland, Mexico, 
Colombia, Denmark, 
Fiji, Indonesia, Italy, 
Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, 
Latvia, Namibia, the 
Philippines, Qatar, 
Rwanda,
Switzerland, 
Singapore.We believe that the overarching focus of the Global Digital Compact should be on lever -
aging digital transformation to improve lives, empower people, and advance the SDGs. 
We should also build upon the good work that has been done to implement the Secretary 
General’s Roadmap on Digital Cooperation. The UN provides the inclusivity and legitimacy 
that is much needed to work together to lay down common principles and guidelines for 
cooperation. 321
United States The United States remains firm that such efforts [toward a GDC] must take an inclusive 
multistakeholder approach; not duplicate ongoing efforts, particularly on cyber; reinforce 
human rights, including freedom of expression online, and add value to the global dialogue 
on digital cooperation.322Annex 1.2: Member States’ contributions during the PGA Thematic 
Consultations on the Global Digital Compact (February 21, 2022)
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 71
Annex 1.3: Member States’ contributions during the PGA Thematic 
Consultations on the New Agenda for Peace (February 21, 2022)
MEMBER STATE REMARKS 
Canada, Australia,  
New Zealand 
(CANZ)Investments in conflict prevention and peacebuilding are critical to:
• addressing the root causes of violence;
• staving off an escalation that heightens the risk of atrocity crimes;
• preventing a recurrence in conflict affected areas;
• helping countries affected by conflict attain the SDGs; as well as
• promoting human rights and gender equality.323
The Caribbean Community
(CARICOM)What is clear to us and made all the clearer by a number of ongoing international 
security crises is that, in its present form, the Council does not appear able to address, 
as effectively as we would wish, the security challenges the world is facing.324
China We are open to the proposed New Agenda for Peace and support in principle 
Secretary General’s efforts to respond to the evolving international security situation 
and promote multilateral arms control and disarmament agenda in a step-by-step 
manner so as to maintain global strategic stability.325
European Union Extended support for a “New Agenda for Peace” that: 
(i) advances a comprehensive and integrated approach to peace and security.
(ii) reinforce the commitment to WPS by ensuring the full, equal and meaningful par -
ticipation of women in all stages of peace processes and peacebuilding, and ensuring 
accountability for its implementation.
(iii) places focus on prevention, and strengthen mediation capacities, including those 
of regional organizations.326
Japan Supported the emphasis on “investing in prevention and peacebuilding”, along with 
the proposal to expand the role of the Peacebuilding Commission to “more geo -
graphical and substantive settings as well as to addressing the cross-cutting issues 
of security.”
Proposed adding “strengthening international order based on the rule of law” as the 
seventh core area of the “New Agenda for Peace.”327
Switzerland Called to enhance investment in prevention and peacebuilding. Extended support for 
a substantial role for the Peacebuilding Commission, and placing women and girls at 
the heart of security policy.328
Norway New agenda would need to build on the principles of women, peace and security and 
place women and gender equality at the heart of collective efforts.329
United Kingdom Extended support for proposals - “strengthening international foresight” and “pre -
vention”, and called for adopting a holistic, cross-pillar approach – in line with the 
agreed Sustaining Peace resolutions. 
New Agenda for Peace must be underpinned by the principles of human rights, 
international law and the UN Charter. Supports the idea of placing gender equality 
at the center of the security agenda, and increasing the effectiveness, sustainability 
and impact of peacebuilding financing.330
South Africa Called to increase investments in prevention, preventive diplomacy, UN Good 
Offices and peacebuilding. Noted that the PBC could expand its scope both 
geographically and thematically, and the PBF requires predictable and sustainable 
financing. Called for enhancing focus on implementing the Women, Peace and 
Security (WPS) agenda.331
Republic of Korea Supported the focus on prevention and cross-pillar approaches. Expanded support 
for viable funding in prevention and peacebuilding, and called upon PBC to address 
regional engagements as well as cross-cutting issues such as climate change, de -
velopment, and human rights. Supported the OCA report’s approach to putting 
women and girls at the center of peace.332
72
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Annex 2: List of resources on global 
governance innovation from the Stimson 
Center and its partners
Reports and Books:
• Confronting the Crisis of Global Governance  (June 2015)
• Just Security in an Undergoverned World  (Oxford University Press, 2018)
• An Innovation Agenda for UN75: The Albright-Gambari Commission Report and the Road to 2020  
(June 2019)
• Reimagining Governance in a Multipolar World  (co-published by the Doha Forum and Stimson 
Center, September 2019)
• UN 2.0: Ten Innovations for Global Governance – 75 Years beyond San Francisco  (June 2020)
• Coping with New and Old Crises: Global and Regional Cooperation in an Age of Epidemic 
Uncertainty  (co-published by the Doha Forum and Stimson Center, December 2020)
• Fulfilling the UN75 Declaration’s Promise: An Expert Series’ Synthesis of Major Insights and 
Recommendation s (June 2021)
• Beyond UN75: A Roadmap for Inclusive, Networked & Effective Global Governance  (June 2021)
• Building Back Together and Greener: Twenty Initiatives for a Just, Healthy and Sustainable Global 
Recovery  (co-published by the Doha Forum and Stimson Center, September 2021)
• Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact for the Future  (June 2022) 
Action Plans from the Global Policy Dialogues series:
• Preventive Action, Sustaining Peace & Global Governanc e (Doha: Doha Institute for Graduate 
Studies, December 2018)
• Global Security, Justice & Economic Institutions  (Washington, D.C.: Stimson Center, June 2019)
• Climate Governance: Innovating the Paris Agreement and Beyond  (Seoul: Global Green Growth 
Institute, October 2019)
• Global Economic Institutions  (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, November 2019)
• Roadmap for the Future We Want & UN We Need: A Vision 20/20 for UN75 & Beyond  (UN75 
Global Governance Forum, September 2020)
• Global Policy Dialogue on Global Governance Innovation: Beyond UN75 & Our Common Agenda  
(Washington, D.C.: Stimson Center, Georgetown, and USIP, March 2022)
UN75 Global Governance Innovation Perspectives policy brief series:
• Towards Multiple Security Councils  (June 2020)
• Multilateralism for Chronic Risks  (June 2020)
• Closing the Governance Gap in Climate, Security, and Peacebuilding  (September 2020)
• Strengthening the Rules-Based Global Order  (September 2020)
UN75 Regional Dialogues summaries:
• UN75 Regional Dialogue for Africa: Toward Innovation and Renewal of Global and Regional 
Governance  (online, March 30–May 10, 2020)
• UN75 Regional Dialogue for the Americas: Toward Innovation and Renewal of Regional and Global 
Governance  (online, March 20-April 26, 2020)
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 73
Bibliography
Aamer, Farwa and Jace White. “Water Security in the Himalayan 
Region: Navigating Opportunities for Joint Prosperity and 
Conflict Prevention.” High-Level Roundtable Dialogue Report. 
December 2019. Accessed July 4, 2022. https://www.stimson.org/
wp-content/uploads/2021/04/water-security-in-the-himalayan-
region-event-report-20191209.pdf .
Abdenur, Adriana Erthal. “Closing the Governance Gap in Climate, 
Security, and Peacebuilding.” UN 75 Global Governance Innovation 
Perspectives . September 2020. Accessed July 28, 2022. https://
www.stimson.org/2020/closing-the-governance-gap-in-climate-
security-and-peacebuilding/ .
ACM Conferences. “Algorithmic Bias: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining.” 2016. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://dl.acm.org/
doi/10.1145/2939672.2945386 . 
Al Jazeera. “In Pictures: Monsoon Floods Wreak Havoc in South Asia.” 
Al Jazeera , July 22, 2020. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
www.aljazeera.com/gallery/2020/7/22/in-pictures-monsoon-
floods-wreak-havoc-in-south-asia .
Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty. “Cyber Attacks on Critical 
Infrastructure.” June 2016. Accessed July 4, 2022. https://www.
agcs.allianz.com/news-and-insights/expert-risk-articles/cyber-
attacks-on-critical-infrastructure.html .
Amb. de la Fuente Ramírez, Juan Ramón. “Our Common Agenda 
Discussion Series: Global Digital Compact.” Speech, Baha’i 
International Community. New York. 2022. Accessed July 29th, 
2022. https://ggin.stimson.org/bic-c4un-and-the-stimson-center-
our-common-agenda-discussion-series-global-digital-compact/ . 
Amnesty International. “Ethiopia: Troops and Militia Rape, Abduct 
Women and Girls in Tigray Conflict – New Report.” Last modified 
August 11, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.
amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2021/08/ethiopia-troops-and-militia-
rape-abduct-women-and-girls-in-tigray-conflict-new-report/ .
Asian Development Bank. “Digitalization in These Six Sectors Can Boost 
Regional Cooperation in Central Asia.” June 24, 2022. Accessed July 
29, 2022. . https://www.adb.org/news/features/digitalization-six-
sectors-can-boost-regional-cooperation-central-asia .
BAAI. “Beijing AI Principles.” 2019. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://
www.baai.ac.cn/english.html .
Banjo, Damilola. “The Women, Peace and Security Agenda Is Not 
Yielding Results, Diplomats Say.” PassBlue . Last modified 
June 16, 2022. Accessed July 28, 2022. https://www.passblue.
com/2022/06/15/the-women-peace-and-security-agenda-is-not-
yielding-results-diplomats-say/ .
Barbados, Government of. “Statement of Nationally Determined 
Contributions.” July 21, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/2021%20Barbados%20
NDC%20update%20-%2021%20July%202021.pdf .
Barbados. Office of the Prime Minister. “FutureBARBADOS.” Accessed 
August 9, 2022: https://futurebarbados.bb/ .
Basu, Kehkashan. “World Future Council offers support to UN Summit 
of the Future 2023.” World Future Council . Accessed September 2, 
2022.  https://www.worldfuturecouncil.org/world-future-council-
offers-support-to-un-summit-of-the-future-2023/ . 
Behoteguy Cortes, Solange. “Un Combats Disinformation during 
Pandemic.” UNIS Geneva. Accessed July 11, 2022. https://www.
un.org/es/node/69272 .
Bellamy, Alex J. “Conflict Prevention and the Responsibility to 
Protect.” Global Governance  14, No. 2. 2008: 135-156.Bellinger, John B., III. “How Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine Violates 
International Law.” Council on Foreign Relations. February 28, 
2022. Accessed July 28, 2022. https://www.cfr.org/article/how-
russias-invasion-ukraine-violates-international-law .
Bertozzi, Rita. “Youth Policies and Youth Participation: From 
Beneficiaries to Actors.” Italian Journal of Sociology of Education  7, 
No. 1. 2015: 118-147. 
Bhabha, Jacqueline, Richard Garfield, Kirsten Johnson, Gretchen 
Luchsinger, Lisa Oddy, Monica Adhiambo Onyango , Sarah Shteir, 
and Louise Searle. “Shelter from the Storm.” United Nations 
Population Fund. 2015. https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/
sowp/downloads/State_of_World_Population_2015_EN.pdf .
Bodanksy, Daniel. “What’s in a Concept? Global Public Goods, 
International Law, and Legitimacy.” European Journal of 
International Law  23, No. 3. 2012: 651-668.
Bogdan-Martin, Doreen. “Measuring Digital Development: Facts & 
Figures 2019.” ITU News. November 5, 2019. Accessed July 5, 2022. 
https://www.itu.int/hub/2020/05/measuring-digital-development-
facts-figures-2019/ .
Bollyky, Thomas J., and Chad P. Brown. “The Tragedy of Vaccine 
Nationalism: Only Cooperation Can End the Pandemic.” Foreign 
Affairs  99, no. 5. 2020” 96-108.
Boothby, Bill. “Space Weapons and the Law.” International Law Studies 
(U.S. Naval War College)  93, No. 1. 2017: 179-214.
Broadband Commission. “The Digital Transformation of Education: 
Connecting Schools, Empowering Learners.” September 2020. 
Accessed July 5, 2022. https://www.broadbandcommission.org/
publication/the-digital-transformation-of-education/ .
BSA The Software Alliance. “Comparing International Frameworks for 
the Development of Responsible AI - BSA Artificial Intelligence.” 
BSA Artificial Intelligence - BSA | Artificial Intelligence Policy 
Overview, September 24, 2019. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://
ai.bsa.org/global-ai-principles-framework-comparison/ .
BSA The Software Alliance. “Social Principles of Human-Centric 
AI.” 2019. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://ai.bsa.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/09/humancentricai.pdf .
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. “Priority #2: 
International Norms - International Strategy to Better Protect 
the Financial System against Cyber Threats.” Washington, DC, 
November 18, 2020. Last modified November 18, 2020. Accessed 
August 5, 2022. https://carnegieendowment.org/2020/11/18/
priority-2-international-norms-pub-83110 .
Carswell, Andrew. “Unblocking the UN Security Council: The Uniting 
for Peace Resolution.” Journal of Conflict & Security Law  18, No. 3. 
2013: 453-480. 
Center for Strategic and International Studies. “International 
Norms under Pressure: State Compliance with International 
Humanitarian & Human Rights Law.” Accessed August 5, 2022. 
https://www.csis.org/events/international-norms-under-pressure-
state-compliance-international-humanitarian-human-rights .
Centre for Strategic Futures. “Singapore 2077.” Foresight . 2021. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. https://file.go.gov.sg/csfforesight2021.pdf .
Center on International Cooperation. “The Secretary-General’s 
Proposal for Assessed Contributions for the Peacebuilding Fund: 
An Explainer.” Last modified April 14, 2022. Accessed August 11, 
2022. https://cic.nyu.edu/blog/secretary-general%E2%80%99s-
proposal-assessed-contributions-peacebuilding-fund-explainer .
74
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Claesson, Annina.“Coming Together to Fight Fake News: Lessons 
from the European Approach to Disinformation.” Center for 
Strategic and International Studies. Last modified 2019. Accessed 
July 29, 2022. https://www.csis.org/coming-together-fight-fake-
news-lessons-european-approach-disinformation .
Climate Diplomacy. “Turkey, Syria and Iraq: Conflict over the 
Euphrates-Tigris.” Accessed July 4, 2022. https://climate-
diplomacy.org/case-studies/turkey-syria-and-iraq-conflict-over-
euphrates-tigris .
Club of Rome. The Limits to Growth . New York: Universe Books. 1972.
Coalition for the UN We Need. C4UN OCA Report On UN General 
Assembly Informal Interactive Dialogue with the 77th PGA candidate 
H.E. Mr. Csaba Kőrösi (Hungary) . Prepared by Jeffery Huffines. 
May 2022. https://secureservercdn.net/198.71.233.82/b06.41d.
myftpupload.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/C4UN-Report-on-
the-UNGA-Informal-Interactive-Dialogue.pdf .
Collins-Fattedad, Sarah, Michael DeVito, Yasmin Góes, Mariam 
Khorenyan, and Leila Milgrim. “Towards a Global Digital 
Governance Architecture.” Center for Global Affairs, NYU. 
May 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://nyu.app.box.com/s/
ax2jdd1af42nrdemqm1c1h7vuwquhu1n .
Collins, Keith. “Why Net Neutrality Was Repealed and How It Affects 
You.” The New York Times , December 14, 2017. Accessed July 
5, 2022. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/14/technology/net-
neutrality-rules.html .
Colombia. Supreme Court. Future Generations v. Ministry of the 
Environment and Others. STC4360-2018. April 5, 2018.
Commission on Global Security, Justice & Governance. Confronting 
the Crisis of Global Governance . Washington, D.C. and The Hague. 
June 2015. Accessed 28 July, 2022. https://www.stimson.org/
wp-content/files/Commission-on-Global-Security-Justice-
Governance-A4.pdf .
Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency. “Critical 
Infrastructure Threat Information Sharing Framework.” 2022. 
Accessed July 28, 2022. https://www.cisa.gov/publication/ci-
threat-info-sharing-framework .
Davies, Shawn, Therese Pettersson, and Magnus Öberg. “Organized 
violence 1989-2021 and drone warfare.” Journal of Peace Research  
59, no. 4 (2022): 593-610.
Day, Adam, and Jessica Caus. “Conflict Prevention in an Era of Climate 
Change: Adapting the UN to Climate-Security Risks.” New York: 
United Nations University 2020. Accessed July 17, 2022. https://i.
unu.edu/media/cpr.unu.edu/post/3856/UNUClimateSecurity.pdf .
Del Vicario, Michela, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Fabio Petroni, 
Antonio Scala, Guido Caldarelli, H. Eugene Stanley, and Walter 
Quattrociocchi. “The Spreading of Misinformation Online.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  113, No. 3. 2016: 
554-559.
Derviş, Kemal, and Sebastian Strauss. “Global Governance after 
COVID-19: Survey Report.” Washington, D.C. The Brookings 
Institution, August 10, 2021. Accessed July 28, 2022. https://www.
brookings.edu/research/global-governance-after-covid-19/ .
Detsch, Jack. “Russia Is Readying the Zinc Coffins Again.” Foreign 
Policy. August 8, 2022. Accessed on August 22, 2022. https://
foreignpolicy.com/2022/08/08/russia-ukraine-deaths-casualties-
rises/ .
Devdiscourse. “SDG2030: Challenges of Technological Applications 
in Advancing Global Goals | Technology.” Devdiscourse , January 
17, 2020. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://www.devdiscourse.com/
article/technology/835522-sdg2030-challenges-of-technological-
applications-in-advancing-global-goals .
DeVos, Marielle. “The Echo Chamber Effect: Social Media’s Role in 
Political Bias.” Institute in Youth for Policy. Accessed July 29, 
2022. https://www.yipinstitute.com/articles/the-echo-chamber-
effect-social-medias-role-in-political-bias .Di Pippo, Simonetta. “Access to Space for All.” UNCTAD, February 28, 2020. 
Accessed July 28, 2022. https://unctad.org/news/access-space-all .
Doha Forum and Stimson Center. Coping with New and Old Crises: 
Global and Regional Cooperation in an Age of Uncertainty . December 
2020. Accessed August 9, 2022. https://dohaforum.org/
publications/reports/doha-forum-report---2020 .
Doha Forum and Stimson Center. Building Back Together and Greener: 
Twenty Initiatives for a Just, Healthy, and Sustainable Global 
Recovery . September 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
dohaforum.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/
building-back-together-and-greener-092021b.pdf .
 Doha Forum and Stimson Center. Reimagining Governance in a 
Multipolar World . 2019. Accessed September 2, 2022.   https://
dohaforum.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/
reimagining-governance_doha_forum-for-print.pdf .
Dolmans, Maurits and Preston, J. Michael. “Dutch Court Orders 
Shell to Reduce Emissions in First Climate Change Ruling 
Against Company.” Cleary Gottlieb. June 30, 2021. https://
www.clearygottlieb.com/news-and-insights/publication-listing/
dutch-court-orders-shell-to-reduce-emissions-in-first-climate-
change-ruling-against-company#:~:text=Based%20on%20
an%20unwritten%20duty,including%20suppliers%20and%20
end%2Dusers .
Donaldson, Ben. “Liechtenstein’s ‘Veto Initiative’ Wins Wide Approval 
at the UN. Will It Deter the Big Powers?” PassBlue . Last modified 
April 27, 2022. Accessed July 28, 2022. https://www.passblue.
com/2022/04/26/liechtensteins-veto-initiative-wins-wide-
approval-at-the-un-will-it-deter-the-major-powers .
Drake, Nadia. “Will Spacex’s Starlink Satellites Harm Astronomy? 
Here’s What We Know.” National Geographic , May 29, 2019. 
Accessed July 29, 2022. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/
science/article/elon-musk-starlink-internet-satellites-trouble-for-
astronomy-light-pollution .
Dumanova, Madina and Klaus Oblin, “European Union: Has The 
Future Arrived? Overview Of The EU Draft Regulation On 
Artificial Intelligence.” Mondaq . July 26, 2022. Accessed July 29, 
2022. https://www.mondaq.com/austria/new-technology/1215238/
has-the-future-arrived-overview-of-the-eu-draft-regulation-on-
artificial-intelligence- .
Einsiedel, Sebastian von. “What Works in UN Resident Coordinator-
Led Conflict Prevention: Lessons from the Field.” United Nations 
University Centre for Policy Research. June 2018. Accessed July 
28, 2022. https://i.unu.edu/media/cpr.unu.edu/attachment/2856/
RC-Project-Synthesis.pdf .
European Commission. “Questions and Answers: Digital Services 
Act.” May 22, 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://ec.europa.eu/
commission/presscorner/detail/en/QANDA_20_2348 .
FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP and WHO. The State of Food Security and 
Nutrition in the World 2022. Repurposing food and agricultural 
policies to make healthy diets more affordable . Rome: FAO. 2022. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.fao.org/documents/
card/en/c/cc0639en .
Farry, Maggie. “An Old Problem in the New Normal: The Digital Divide.” 
New America. Last modified July 6, 2019. Accessed August 9, 2022. 
https://www.newamerica.org/the-thread/an-old-problem-in-the-
new-normal-the-digital-divide/?utm_source=google_cpc&utm_me -
dium=ad_grant&utm_campaign=blogs&gclid=CjwKCAjwi8iXBhBeEi -
wAKbUofZ1_jH2zbZE96qHR0izrU6JPW6MojOd33jZ9QeRkWvrlGW -
W3B_7yEhoC45wQAvD_BwE .
Fay, Robert, and Rohinton Medhora. “Global Governance Framework for 
Digital Technologies.” T20 Policy Brief. September 2021. Accessed 
July 29, 2022. https://www.g20-insights.org/wp-content/up -
loads/2021/09/TF4-A_GLOBAL_GOVERNANCE_FRAMEWORK_
FOR_DIGITAL_TECHNOLOGIES.pdf .
 Feldstein, Steven. “Why Internet Access Is a Human Right.” Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace . June 1, 2017. Accessed August 
5, 2022. https://carnegieendowment.org/2017/06/01/why-internet-
access-is-human-right-pub-70151 .
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 75
Finland. Parliament. “Committee for the Future.” Accessed July 
19, 2022. https://www.eduskunta.fi:443/EN/valiokunnat/
tulevaisuusvaliokunta/Pages/default.aspx .
Fitchett, Dana E. “The Digital Divide Is Getting Worse: It’s Time to 
Close It.” Tides, February 4, 2022. Accessed July 5, 2022. https://
www.tides.org/our-community/corporate-partners/the-digital-
divide-is-getting-worse-its-time-to-close-it/# :~:text=Decades%20
after%20the%20term%20%E2%80%9Cdigital,and%20
sometimes%20even%20to%20survive .
G7. Charlevoix Common Vision For The Future Of Artificial Intelligence . 
2018. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://www.mofa.go.jp/
files/000373837.pdf . 
Georgieva, Kristalina, and Pazarbasioglu, Ceyla. “The G20 Common 
Framework for Debt Treatments Must Be Stepped Up.” IMF Blog , 
December 2, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://blogs.imf.
org/2021/12/02/the-g20-common-framework-for-debt-treatments-
must-be-stepped-up/ .
Gessner, Linda. “Knesset Commission for Future Generations.” 
Foundation for Democracy and Sustainability. June 25, 2017. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.fdsd.org/ideas/knesset-
commission-future-generations/ .
Gilchrist, Karen. “IMF Slashes Global GDP Forecast as Economic 
Outlook Grows ‘Gloomy and More Uncertain.” CNBC , July 
26, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.cnbc.
com/2022/07/26/imf-cuts-global-gdp-forecast-as-economic-
outlook-grows-gloomy.html .
Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace. “Homepage.” 
February 28, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
cyberstability.org/ .
Global Forum on Cyber Expertise. “Strengthening Cyber Capacity 
and Expertise Globally through International Collaboration.” 
Accessed July 29, 2022. https://thegfce.org/ .
Global Governance Innovation Network. “Global Policy Dialogue on 
Evidence-Based Solutions and the Road to 2023: Strengthening 
Human Rights, Humanitarian Action, Sustainable Trade & 
Disarmament Cooperation.” Accessed August 12, 2022. https://
ggin.stimson.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/June-2022-GPD_
Synthesis-Report.pdf .
Global Water Forum. “What is Water Diplomacy and Why Should 
You Care?” August 31, 2018. Accessed July 17, 2022. https://
globalwaterforum.org/2018/08/31/what-is-water-diplomacy-and-
why-should-you-care/ .
Göpel, Maja and Pearce, Catherine. “Guarding Our Future: How to 
Include Future Generations in Policy Making.” World Future 
Council Foundation. March 2018. https://www.worldfuturecouncil.
org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/brochure_guarding2018b.pdf .
Government of Italy. “Strategic Programme on Artificial Intelligence, 
2022-2024.” 2021. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://assets.
innovazione.gov.it/1637777513-strategic-program-aiweb.pdf
Gowan, Richard. “Priorities for the UN’s New Agenda for Peace.” 
International Crisis Group. August 11, 2022. Accessed August 
12, 2022. https://www.crisisgroup.org/global/priorities-uns-new-
agenda-peace .
Gul, Ayaz. “Qatar to Host International Meetings on Afghan Peace.” 
Voice of America . August 8, 2021. Accessed August 6, 2022. https://
www.voanews.com/a/us-afghanistan-troop-withdrawal_qatar-
host-international-meetings-afghan-peace/6209327.html .
Guterres, António. Our Common Agenda . United Nations. Report of 
the Secretary-General. September 2021. Accessed May 10, 2022. 
https://www.un.org/en/content/common-agenda-report/assets/
pdf/Common_Agenda_Report_English.pdf . 
Guterres, António. “Roadmap for Digital Cooperation.” United 
Nations. June 2020. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.
un.org/digital-cooperation-roadmap .Guterres, António. “Briefing by the Secretary-General on the progress 
on ‘Our Common Agenda’ .” United Nations. August 4, 2022. 
Accessed September 1, 2022. https://media.un.org/en/asset/k13/
k13k0z03h2 .
Guterres, António. “Secretary-General’s remarks to the General 
Assembly Consultation on ‘Our Common Agenda’.” United 
Nations. August 4, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/statement/2022-08-04/secretary-
generals-remarks-the-general-assembly-consultation-our-
common-agenda-bilingual-delivered-scroll-down-for-all-english-
version .
Guterres, António. “Tackling the Inequality Pandemic: A New Social 
Contract for a New Era.” Nelson Mandela Lecture. July 18, 2020. 
Accessed May 19, 2022. https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/
statement/2020-07-18/secretary-generals-nelson-mandelalecture-
%E2%80%9Ctackling-the-inequality-pandemic-newsocial-
contract-for-new-era%E2%80%9D-delivered .
Hackett, Liam. “Cyberbullying and Its Implications for Human 
Rights.” UN Chronicle , December 2016. Accessed July 12, 2022. 
https://www.un.org/en/chronicle/article/cyberbullying-and-its-
implications-human-rights . 
Hearn, Sarah, Alejandra Kubitschek Bujones, and Alischa Kugel. The 
United Nations “Peacebuilding Architecture”: Past, Present and 
Future . New York University Center on International Cooperation. 
May 2014. Accessed May 16, 2022. https://cic.nyu.edu/sites/
default/files/un_peace_architecture.pdf . 
Herrberg, Antje, John Packer, and Miguel Varela. “The Evolution of the 
United Nations Standby Team of Mediation Experts in Context 
Key Trends, Issues and Recommendations.” Peace My Way. 
February 2015. Accessed July 28, 2022. https://rc-services-assets.
s3.eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/evolution%20of%20
UN%20standby%20team.pdf .
Higgins-Bloom, Kate. “Food Fight.” Foreign Policy , September 12, 2018. 
Accessed July 28, 2022. https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/09/12/food-
fight-illegal-fishing-conflict/ .
Hill, Kashmir. “Wrongfully Accused by an Algorithm.” The New York 
Times , August 3, 2020. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/06/24/technology/facial-recognition-arrest.
html .
Ho, Selina. “The China–India Water Dispute: The Potential for 
Escalation.” Indo-Pacific Perspectives . June 2021: 24-28. Accessed 
July 4, 2022. https://www.airuniversity.af.edu/Portals/10/JIPA/
IndoPacificPerspectives/June%202021/06%20Ho.pdf .
Hove, Dali ten. “Pathetic: The US Pulls the Plug on a UN Global Cease-
Fire Resolution.” PassBlue , May 11, 2020. Accessed August 6, 2022. 
https://www.passblue.com/2020/05/10/pathetic-the-us-pulls-the-
plug-on-a-un-global-cease-fire-resolution/ .
Hsiang, Solomon M., Kyle C. Meng, and Mark A. Cane. “Civil conflicts 
are associated with the global climate.” Nature , August 24, 2011. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.nature.com/articles/
nature10311 .
Huber, Laura. “The Impact of Women Peacekeepers on Public 
Support for Peacekeeping in Troop- Contributing Countries.” 
International Peace Institute. May 2022. Accessed July 28, 2022. 
https://www.ipinst.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/IPI-E-RPT-
Impact_of_Women_Peacekeepersweb.pdf .
Hungary. Office of the Commissioner for Fundamental Rights. “The 
Role of the Ombudsman.” Accessed July 19, 2022. https://www.
ajbh.hu/web/ajbh-en/the-role-of-the-ombudsman .
Husain, Arif. “The Ukraine War Is Deepening Global Food Insecurity- 
What Can Be Done?” United States Institute of Peace. May 16, 
2022. https://www.usip.org/publications/2022/05/ukraine-war-
deepening-global-food-insecurity-what-can-be-done .
Husseini, Sarah. “UK To Strengthen Internet Laws To Fight Russian 
Disinformation.” The Organization for World Peace. August 18, 
2022. Accessed August 23, 2022. https://theowp.org/reports/uk-to-
strengthen-internet-laws-to-fight-russian-disinformation/ .
76
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Independent Commission on Multilateralism. Report of the Independent 
Commission on Multilateralism, Pulling Together: The Multilateral 
System and Its Future . September 2016. Accessed September 
2, 2022. https://www.ipinst.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/
ICM_Summary_Report.pdf .
Institute for Economics & Peace. Positive Peace Report 2020: Analysing 
the Factors that Sustain Peace . Accessed 28 August, 2022. http://
visionofhumanity.org/resources .
International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty.  The 
Responsibility to Protect: Report of the International Commission on 
Intervention and State Sovereignty . December 2001. 
International Crisis Group. “Climate Security: An input paper for the 
High-Level Advisory Panel on Effective Multilateralism.” April 23, 
2022. Accessed May 23, 2022. https://highleveladvisoryboard.org/
download/icg-climate-security/ .
International Institute for Strategic Studies. The Armed Conflict Survey, 
2021 . London: IISS. November, 2021. 
International Labour Organization. “Global Employment Trends for 
Youth 2020: Technology and the future of jobs.” Geneva. 2020. 
Accessed September 2, 2, 2022. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/
groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/
publication/wcms_737648.pdf .
International Labour Organization. “Introduction to International 
Labour Standards.” Accessed August 23, 2022. https://www.
ilo.org/global/standards/introduction-to-international-labour-
standards/lang--en/index.htm# :~:text=Since%201919%2C%20
the%20International%20Labour,%2C%20equity%2C%20
security%20and%20dignity .
International Labour Organization. World Employment and Social 
Outlook: Trends 2022 . Geneva. 2022. Accessed September 2, 2, 
2022. https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---
dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_834081.pdf .
International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook Update, July 
2022: Gloomy and More Uncertain . New York: IMF. July 2022. 
Accessed September 2, 2, 2022. https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/
Publications/WEO/2022/Update/July/English/text-en.ashx .
Internet Governance Forum. “Three Possible Architectures for Global 
Digital Cooperation.” 2019. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://
www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/42-three-possible-
architectures-for-global-digital-cooperation .
IPCC. Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C. Summary for 
Policymakers . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2018.
IPCC. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  2022. 
ITU. “Regional Initiatives and Projects/Activities.” Accessed July 
11, 2022. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Regional-Presence/
ArabStates/Pages/Regional_Initiatives_Projects.aspx .
Johnson Sirleaf, Ellen. “A Voice for Freedom!” Nobel Lecture. Oslo. 
December 10, 2011. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.
nobelprize.org/prizes/peace/2011/johnson_sirleaf/lecture/ .
Joint Statement Finland, Mexico, Colombia, Denmark, Fiji, Indonesia, 
Italy, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Namibia, the Philippines, 
Qatar, Rwanda, Switzerland, Singapore . “Statement at General 
Assembly on Our Common Agenda.” UN:NY. February 21, 2022. 
Accessed July 29, 2022. https://estatements.unmeetings.org/
estatements/10.0010/20220221/qblUxtUrB06g/mGL3G7gREXnw_
en.pdf .
Jürgenson, Sven. “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.” Permanent Mission of Estonia to the UN, February 21, 
2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://estatements.unmeetings.
org/estatements/10.0010/20220221/AurDDRGNNEr8/
qUHhurDvyHqC_en.pdf . Kaul, Inge, Grunberg, Isabelle, and Stern, Marc A. “Defining Global 
Public Goods.” In Global Public Goods: International Cooperation 
in the 21st Century , edited by Kaul, Inge, Grunberg, Isabelle, and 
Stern, Marc A., 2-19. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1999. 
Kennedy, Bingham. “Environmental Scarcity and the Outbreak of 
Conflict.” Population Reference Bureau Resource Library. January 
1, 2001. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.prb.org/
resources/environmental-scarcity-and-the-outbreak-of-conflict/ .
King, Marcus DuBois. “Water Stress: A Triple Threat in Nigeria.” 
Pacific Council on International Policy Online Magazine , February 
15, 2019. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.pacificcouncil.
org/newsroom/water-stress-triple-threat-nigeria .
Kingdon, John W. Agendas, Alternatives, and Public Policies . 2nd ed. New 
York: Longman. 1995.
Kloss, Emerson. “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.” Permanent Mission of Brazil to the UN, 2022. 
February 21, 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://estatements.
unmeetings.org/estatements/10.0010/20220221/AurDDRGNNEr8/
zCJtGNrxIwS8_en.pdf .
Knappe, Henrike, Anne-Katrin Holfelder, David L öw Beer, and Patrizia 
Nanz. “The politics of making and unmaking (sustainable) 
futures: introduction to the special feature.” Sustainability Science  
14. 2019: 891-898 .
Komara, Kabine. “Setting the example for Cooperative Management 
of Transboundary Water Resources in West Africa.” World 
Bank Blogs , June 27, 2014. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
blogs.worldbank.org/nasikiliza/setting-example-cooperative-
management-transboundary-water-resources-west-africa .
Korea Digital Development Program. “Kodi.” World Bank. 2019. Accessed 
July 29, 2022 https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/kodi .
Krznaric, Roman. “To Safeguard Future Generations, We Must Learn 
How to Be Better Ancestors.” The Guardian , February 12, 2021. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2021/feb/12/future-generations-ancestors-politics-
business-planet .
Le Roux, Jean. “Pro-Russian Facebook Assets in Mali Coordinated 
Support for Wagner Group, Anti-Democracy Protests.” Medium , 
February 17, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://medium.
com/dfrlab/pro-russian-facebook-assets-in-mali-coordinated-
support-for-wagner-group-anti-democracy-protests-2abaac4d87c4 .
Lederer, Edith M. “US Says It Opposes UN Resolution Calling for 
Gaza Cease-fire.” ABC News , May 19, 2021. Accessed September 
2, 2022. https://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/us-opposes-
resolutioncalling-gaza-cease-fire-77791153 .
Li, Cathy. “Who Will Govern the Metaverse?” World Economic Forum. 
May 25, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022.  https://www.weforum.
org/agenda/2022/05/metaverse-governance/ .
Liff, Adam P. “Cyberwar: a new ‘absolute weapon’? The proliferation of 
cyberwarfare capabilities and interstate war.” Journal of Strategic 
Studies  35, No. 3. 2012: 401-428. 
Llovio, Louis. “Blacks and Hispanics More Likely to Lack Access to 
Internet and Technology, Study Finds.” Sarasota Herald-Tribune , 
November 22, 2020. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://www.
heraldtribune.com/story/news/local/2020/11/22/blacks-and-
hispanics-more-likely-to-lack-access-to-internet/3765787001/ .
Lovgren, S. “Many freshwater fish have declined by 76 percent in 
less than 50 years.” National Geographic , May 4, 2021. Accessed 
September 2, 2022.  https://www.nationalgeographic.com/
animals/article/migratory-freshwater-fish-decline-globally .
Lynfield, Ben. “Israel’s Rewarding Road to Normalization.” Foreign 
Policy , January 31, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022.  http://
foreignpolicy.com/2022/01/31/israel-abraham-accords-
normalization-middle-east/ .
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 77
Lyons, Oren. “Seven Generations - the Role of Chief.” PBS. Accessed 
August 31, 2022. https://www.pbs.org/warrior/content/timeline/
opendoor/roleOfChief.html# :~:text=%22The%20Peacemaker%20
taught%20us%20about,enjoy%20what%20you%20have%20
today.%22 .
Ma, Jack. “Ma Discusses the Power of Thirty.” World Economic 
Forum. January 2017. Accessed September 2, 2022.  https://youtu.
be/2heuLr1Knt0 .
Magnoni, Silvia. “Global Partnerships Are Only as Strong as Their 
Diversity.” World Economic Forum. January 31, 2020. Accessed 
August 9, 2022. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/01/
partnerships-are-only-as-strong-as-their-diversity-d5d634549b/ .
Mahoozi, Sanam. “Sandstorms Are Sweeping across the Middle East. 
What’s Going On?” World Economic Forum. July 8, 2022. https://
www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/07/rising-heat-drives-crippling-
sandstorms-across-the-middle-east/ .
Malsin, Jared. “Russia, Ukraine Clear Way for Grain Exports to 
Resume Amid Fears of Global Food Crisis.” Wall Street Journal . 
July 22, 2022. https://www.wsj.com/articles/russia-ukraine-clear-
way-for-grain-exports-to-resume-amid-fears-of-global-food-
crisis-11658499653 .
Malyarenko, Tatyana and Wolff, Stefan. “Ukraine war: why 
Moscow could go nuclear over Kyiv’s ‘threats’ to Crimea.” The 
Conversation , July 20, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
theconversation.com/ukraine-war-why-moscow-could-go-
nuclear-over-kyivs-threats-to-crimea-187188 .
Matthews, David. “UK rejects EU approach to artificial intelligence in 
favour of ‘pro-innovation’ policy.” Science Business , July 19, 2022. 
Accessed July 29, 2022. https://sciencebusiness.net/news/uk-rejects-
eu-approach-artificial-intelligence-favour-pro-innovation-policy . 
Mauldin, William and Malsin, Jared. “Turkey, U.N. Eye Sea Lane 
for Grain Through Ukraine’s Mines.” Wall Street Journal . June 
16, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.wsj.com/
articles/turkey-u-n-eye-sea-lane-for-grain-through-ukraines-
mines-11655379556 .
McQuilkin, Jamie. “Doing Justice to the Future: A global index of 
intergenerational solidarity derived from national statistics.” 
Intergenerational Justice Review  4, No. 1. 2018: 4-21.
Mellor, Sophie.“The Deadliest Extreme Weather Event in Europe: 
Extreme Heat Waves Fueled by Climate Change Could 
Fundamentally Change the Way We Live.” Fortune , June 17, 2022. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://fortune.com/2022/06/17/heat-
waves-around-world-extreme-deadly-climate-change/ .
Milman, Oliver. “Trump administration cut pandemic early warning 
program in September,” The Guardian , April 3, 2020. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/
apr/03/trump-scrapped-pandemic-early-warning-program-
system-before-coronavirus .
Minale, Lemlem Fiseha. “Statement at General Assembly on Our 
Common Agenda.” Permanent Mission of Ethiopia to the UN. 
February 21, 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://estatements.
unmeetings.org/estatements/10.0010/20220221/qblUxtUrB06g/
k50FQKxEqjWy_en.pdf .
Mistreanu, Simina. “Study Links Nike, Adidas and Apple to Forced 
Uighur Labor.” Forbes Magazine , March 2, 2020. Accessed July 20, 
2022. https://www.forbes.com/sites/siminamistreanu/2020/03/02/
study-links-nike- adidas-and-apple-to-forced-uighur-
labor/?sh=259359321003 .
Mohammed, Amina J. “With Almost Half of World’s Population Still 
Offline, Digital Divide Risks Becoming ‘New Face of Inequality’, 
Deputy Secretary-General Warns General Assembly.” United 
Nations. April 27, 2021. Accessed July 5 2022. https://www.un.org/
press/en/2021/dsgsm1579.doc.htm .
Mukherjee, Supantha. “Space Debris: How Dangerous Is It and Where 
Does It Come From?” World Economic Forum. November 24, 
2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.weforum.org/
agenda/2021/11/space-debris-satellite-international-space-station/ .Network of Institutions for Future Generations. “About.” Accessed 
August 18, 2022. https://futureroundtable.org/web/network-
of-institutions-for-future-generations/about# :~:text=The%20
NIFG%20consists%20of%20a,means%20and%20across%20
various%20discipline s.
Next Generation Fellows. “Our Future Agenda.” Washington D.C.: 
United Nations Foundation, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022.  
https://ourfutureagenda.org/report .
Nguyen, Thuy. “Digital Asean.” World Economic Forum. 2020. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.weforum.org/projects/
digital-asean .
Niarchos, Nicolas. “The Dark Side of Congo’s Cobalt Rush.” The 
New Yorker , May 24, 2021. Accessed July 20, 2022. https://www.
newyorker.com/magazine/2021/05/31/the-dark-side-of-congos-
cobalt-rush .
Nicholas Davis, Mark Esposito, and Landry Signé. “‘Agile governance’ 
could redesign policy on data protection. Here’s why that matters.” 
World Economic Forum. May 2, 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. 
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2022/05/agile-governance-
fragmentation-tech-regulation/ .
Nichols, Michelle. “Russia, China Veto Syria Aid via Turkey for Second 
Time This Week.” Reuters , July 10, 2020. Accessed September 
2, 2022.  https://www.reuters.com/article/us-syria-security-un/
russiachina-veto-syria-aid-via-turkey-for-second-time-this-
weekidUSKBN24B2NW .
OECD. “Governance for Youth, Trust and Intergenerational Justice: 
Fit for All Generations?” OECD Public Governance Reviews. 
Paris: OECD Publishing, 2020. Accessed September 2, 2022.  
https://doi.org/10.1787/c3e5cb8a-en .
OHCHR. “The Human Rights Council and the role of the Office of the 
High Commissioner for Human Rights.” Accessed August 16, 2022. 
https://www2.ohchr.org/english/press/hrc/kit/hrcs_fs2.pdf .
Ombudsman for Future Generations. “Appendix 1: 
Introduction of the Hungarian Ombudsman for 
Future Generations.” Office of the Commissioner of 
Fundamental Rights Hungary. 2011. Accessed September 
2, 2022. https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/
CommissionerforFundamentalRightsHungaryInputs2.pdf .
Paikowsky, Deganit. “Why Russia tested its Anti-satellite weapon.” 
Foreign Policy , December 26, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022.  
https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/12/26/putin-russia-tested-space-
asat-satellite-weapon/ .
Pantuliano, Sara.   “Reimagining Multilateralism: Seizing the 
Opportunity for Change.” Overseas Development Institute. 2021. 
Accessed August 9, 2022. https://odi.org/en/insights/reimagining-
multilateralism-seizing-the-opportunity-for-change/ .
Pascual, Unai, et al. Summary for policymakers of the methodological 
assessment of the diverse values and valuation of nature . Geneva: 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services (IPBES). July 2022.
Pazzanese, Christina. “Ethical Concerns Mount as AI Takes Bigger 
Decision-Making Role.” Harvard Gazette , October 26, 2020. 
Accessed July 12, 2022. https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/
story/2020/10/ethical-concerns-mount-as-ai-takes-bigger-
decision-making-role/ .
Pearson, Lester B. “Lester B. Pearson Nobel Peace Prize Speech.” Oslo. 
December 10, 1957. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.
nobelprize.org/prizes/peace/1957/pearson/acceptance-speech/ . 
Perell, Daniel and Nudhara Yusuf. “What Kind of Ancestors do We 
Wish to Be? The Heart of Stockholm+50.” The Baha’i International 
Community Perspectives , May 31, 2022. Accessed August 11, 2022. 
https://www.bic.org/perspectives/what-kind-ancestors-do-we-
wish-be-heart-stockholm50 .
Perell, Daniel. “Bridging the ‘Political Will’ Gap.” Baha’i International 
Community Perspectives , June 8, 2021. Accessed August 11, 2022. 
https://www.bic.org/perspectives/bridging-political-will-gap .
78
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY Petcu, Cristina, and Richard Ponzio. “The UN-75 Commitment, A 
Daring Commitment for a More Perfect World.” PassBlue, June 
23, 2020. https://www.passblue.com/2020/06/23/the-un-75-
declaration-a-daring-commitment-for-a-stronger-world/ .
Pettersson, Therése, et al. “Organized Violence 1989–2020, with a Special 
Emphasis on Syria.” Journal of Peace Research  58, No. 4. 2021: 809-825.
Ping Chan, Yu. “Our Common Agenda Discussion Series: Global 
Digital Compact.” Speech. Baha’i International Community. New 
York. 2022. https://ggin.stimson.org/event/bic-c4un-and-the-
stimson-center-our-common-agenda-discussion-series-global-
digital-compact/ .
Podder, Sukanya, Saji Prelis, and Joseph Jimmy Sankaituah. “Youth, 
Peace and Programming for Change: Critical reflection between 
the University, the Headquarters and the Field.” Global Policy , 
August 31, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.
globalpolicyjournal.com/articles/conflict-and-security/youth-
peace-and-programming-change-critical-reflection-between .
Pohle, Julia. “The Internet as a Global Good: UNESCO’s Attempt to 
Negotiate an International Framework for Universal Access to 
Cyberspace.” International Communication Gazette  80, No. 4. 2018: 
354-368.
Ponzio, Richard and Jerry Zhang. “Here Are the Next Steps the US 
Should Take to Re-Engage With the UN.” PassBlue , February 
9, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.passblue.
com/2022/02/09/the-next-steps-for-fuller-us-re-engagement-
with-the-un/ .
Ponzio, Richard et al. An Innovation Agenda for UN 75.  Washington, 
D.C.: The Stimson Center. June 2019. Accessed September 2, 2022. 
https://ggin.stimson.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/Innovation-
Agenda-for-UN-75-June2019.pdf .
Ponzio, Richard, et al. Road to 2023: Our Common Agenda and the Pact 
for the Future. Washington, D.C.: The Stimson Center. June 2022. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.stimson.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/GGIN-Report-061322-WEB2.pdf .
Ponzio, Richard, and Rama Mani. “Peaceful Settlement of Disputes 
and Conflict Prevention.” In The Oxford Handbook on the United 
Nations . 2nd ed, edited by Thomas G. Weiss and Sam Daws, 369-
419. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2018.
President of the General Assembly. “Our Common Agenda Summary 
of the Thematic Consultations.” Accessed September 2, 2022. 
https://www.un.org/pga/76/wp-content/uploads/sites/101/2022/05/
Final-OCA-summary-.pdf .
President of the General Assembly. “Vision Statement by Ambassador 
Csaba Korosi, Director at the Office of the President of Hungary, 
Candidate for the 77th President of the UN General Assembly.” 
Korosi, Csaba. New York. 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. 
https://www.un.org/pga/76/wp-content/uploads/sites/101/2022/03/
Vision-statement-1.pdf .
Rahnama, Hossein and Alex Sandy Pentland. “The New Rules of Data 
Privacy.” Harvard Business Review ,  February 25, 2022. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. https://hbr.org/2022/02/the-new-rules-of-
data-privacy .
Raz, Joseph. “On the Authority and Interpretation of Constitutions: 
Some Preliminaries.” In  Constitutionalism: Philosophical 
Foundations , edited by Larry Alexander, 152-193. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 1998.
Romero, Alejandro, and Jonathan Nelson. “Will the World Clean up 
‘Information Pollution’ in 2022?” World Economic Forum. March 
24, 2022. Accessed July 11, 2022. https://www.weforum.org/
agenda/misinformation-cybercrime-covid-pandemic .
Rudnick, Lisa, and Joseph Guat. “What the Digital Geneva Convention 
Means for the Future of Humanitarian Action – UNHCR 
Innovation.” UNHCR Innovation, June 25, 2017. Accessed July 
28, 2022. https://www.unhcr.org/innovation/digital-geneva-
convention-mean-future-humanitarian-action/ .Russell T. Vought “Memorandum For The Heads Of Executive 
Departments And Agencies.” White House,. Accessed July 29, 
2022. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/
Draft-OMB-Memo-on-Regulation-of-AI-1-7-19.pdf .
Russian Federation. “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.” February 21, 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://
estatements.unmeetings.org/estatements/10.0010/20220221/
AurDDRGNNEr8/luWRulqrm2Qg_en.pdf .
Saijo, Tatsuyoshi. “Future Design.” Working Papers SDES-2019-
5, Kochi University of Technology, School of Economics and 
Management 2019. https://ideas.repec.org/p/kch/wpaper/sdes-
2019-5.html .
Sánchez Margalef, Héctor, Carme Colomina, and Richard Youngs. 
“The Impact of Disinformation on Democratic Processes and 
Human Rights.” European Parliament, April 22, 2021. Accessed 
July 11, 2022. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/
STUD/2021/653635/EXPO_STU(2021)653635_EN.pdf .
SDSN, Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy, and Center for 
Global Commons at the University of Tokyo. Global Commons 
Stewardship Index . Paris, New Haven, and Tokyo. 2021. https://
envirocenter.yale.edu/our-work/projects/global-commons-
stewardship-index .
Stewart, Frances and Arnim Langer. In  Horizontal Inequalities and 
Conflict: Conflict, Inequality and Ethnicity , edited by Frances 
Stewart, 54-82. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 2008. 
Seragaldin, Ismail. “Water: conflicts set to arise within as well as 
between states.” Nature , May 13 2009. Accessed July 26, 2022. 
https://www.nature.com/articles/459163b .  
Shalev, Ariella. “Japan’s movement of Future Design councils.” 
Foundation for Democracy and Sustainable Development. 
December 15, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.fdsd.
org/ideas/future-design-japan/ .
Simpson, Graeme. “Independent Progress Study on Youth, Peace, and 
Security.” UNFPA and PBSO. 2018. Accessed August 8, 2022. https://
www.youth4peace.info/system/files/2018-10/youth-web-english.pdf .
Skoog, Olof. “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.” Head of the EU Delegation to the UN,. February 21, 
2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://estatements.unmeetings.org/
estatements/10.0010/20220221/qblUxtUrB06g/hvbPTkYyg7Fo_
en.pdf .
SonicWall. 2022 SonicWall Cyber Threat Report . February 17, 2022. 
Accessed July 4, 2022. https://www.sonicwall.com/medialibrary/
en/white-paper/2022-sonicwall-cyber-threat-report.pdf .
Steube, Adrian. “The Veto Initiative’s First Tests: Is the Step Toward 
Reform Working?” PassBlue , August 2, 2022. Accessed September 
2, 2022. https://www.passblue.com/2022/08/02/the-veto-
initiatives-first-tests-is-the-step-toward-reform-working/ .
Talihärm, Anna-Maria. “Towards Cyberpeace: Managing Cyberwar 
through International Cooperation.” UN Chronicle , August 2013. 
Accessed July 28, 2022. https://www.un.org/en/chronicle/article/
towards-cyberpeace-managing-cyberwar-through-international-
cooperation .
Tannenwald, Nina. “Is Using Nuclear Weapons Still Taboo?” Foreign 
Policy , July 1, 2022. Accesssed September 2, 2022. https://
foreignpolicy.com/2022/07/01/nuclear-war-taboo-arms-control-
russia-ukraine-deterrence/ .
Telegraph Reporters. “Boris Johnson ‘scrapped Cabinet pandemic 
committee six months before coronavirus hit UK.’” The Daily 
Telegraph , June 13, 2020. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
www.telegraph.co.uk/politics/2020/06/13/boris-johnson-scrapped-
cabinet-pandemic-committee-six-months/ .
Tharoor, Ishaan. “How Somalia’s Fishermen became Pirates.” Time , 
April 18, 2009. Accessed July 17, 2022. http://content.time.com/
time/world/article/0,8599,1892376,00.html .
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 79
The Global Multistakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet 
Governance. NETmundial Multistakeholder Statement . 2014. 
Accessed July 29, 2022. https://netmundial.br/wp-content/
uploads/2014/04/NETmundial-Multistakeholder-Document.pdf .
The Nuclear Threat Initiative. “Paros Treaty.” June 2, 2022. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. https://www.nti.org/education-center/treaties-
and-regimes/proposed-prevention-arms-race-space-paros-treaty/ .
The Visual Journalism Team. “Ukraine war in maps: Tracking the 
Russian invasion.” BBC , August 9, 2022. Accessed September 2, 
2022. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-60506682 .
Thompson, Peter. “The Sustainable Exploitation of the Ocean’s 
Minerals and Resources.” UN Chronicle , April 2013. Accessed July 
17, 2022. https://www.un.org/en/chronicle/article/sustainable-
exploitation-oceans-minerals-and-resources . U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission. “SEC Proposes to Enhance Disclosures by 
Certain Investment Advisers and Investment Companies About 
ESG Investment Practices.” Press Release. Last modified May 25, 
2022. Accessed August 23, 2022. https://www.sec.gov/news/press-
release/2022-92 .
UN Department of Global Communications. “5 ways the UN is fighting 
‘infodemic’ of misinformation.” July 5, 2022. Accessed July 20, 
2022. https://www.un.org/en/un-coronavirus-communications-
team/five-ways-united-nations-fighting-misinformation .
UN Women. Gender-Inclusive Peace Processes: Strengthening Women’s 
Meaningful Participation through Constituency Building. Meeting 
report . October 2021. Accessed August 12, 2022. https://
www.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2021/10/
proceedings-gender-inclusive-peace-processes .
UN Water. “Water Scarcity.” Accessed August 1, 2022. https://www.
unwater.org/water-facts/scarcity/ .
UN. DESA. World Population Prospects, 2019. Vol. 1: Comprehensive 
Tables . Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.un.org/
development/desa/pd/content/world-population-prospects-2019-
volume-i-comprehensive-tables . 
UNDP. RBAP Foresight Playbook . UNDP Asia Pacific. 2022. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. https://www.undp.org/asia-pacific/
publications/undp-rbap-foresight-playbook .
UNESCO. Declaration on the Responsibilities of the Present Generations 
Towards Future Generations . 29 C/Resolution 44. November 12, 1997.
UNICEF. The Climate Crisis is a Child Rights Crisis: Introducing the 
Children’s Climate Risk Index . New York: United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF). 2021. Accessed August 3, 2022: https://www.
unicef.org/media/105376/file/UNICEF-climate-crisis-child-rights-
crisis.pdf . 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Ministerial 
Declaration of the Group of 77 and China to UNCTAD XV. 
October 4, 2021. https://unctad.org/system/files/official-
document/td522_en.pdf .
United Nations Development Programme. Human Development Report 
1994 . Oxford University Press: New York and Oxford. 1994. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/
documents//hdr1994encompletenostatspdf.pdf .
United Nations Environment Programme. The Montreal Protocol on 
Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. September 16, 1987. Accessed 
July 12, 2022.  https://ozone.unep.org/treaties/montreal-protocol .
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. “Figures at a Glance.” 
UNHCR, June 16, 2021. Accessed on August 1, 2022. https://www.
unhcr.org/figures-at-a-glance.html .
United Nations Major Group for Children and Youth. Principles and 
Barriers for Meaningful Youth Engagement at the United Nations . 2017. 
Accessed August 8, 2022. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/
content/documents/20522UNMGCYPrinciplesandBarriersforMean -
ingfulYouthEngagement.pdf .United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. “Sendai Framework 
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.” 2015. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. https://www.preventionweb.net/files/43291_
sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf .
United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs. “Access to Space for All.” 
Accessed July 10, 2022. https://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/
access2space4all/index.html .
United Nations Peacebuilding. “Youth, Peace and Security.” Compilation 
of key documents. Accessed July 20, 2022. https://www.un.org/
peacebuilding/policy-issues-and-partnerships/policy/youth .
United Nations Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. “Peace and 
Development Advisors - Joint UNDP-DPPA Programme on 
Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention.” Accessed 
August 26, 2022. https://dppa.un.org/en/peace-and-development-
advisors-joint-undp-dppa-programme-building-national-
capacities-conflict .
United Nations. “At ‘Our Common Agenda’ Talks, Secretary-General 
Says Summits on Future, Sustainable Development Goals ‘Last, 
Best Chance’ to Manage, Solve Global Challenges.” August 4, 
2022.  Accessed September 2, 2022. https://press.un.org/en/2022/
sgsm21399.doc.htm .
United Nations. “Briefing by the Secretary-General on the 
Implementation of the ‘Our Common Agenda’ Report and 
Interactive Panel Discussion.” Press release. August 4, 
2022. Accessed September 2, 2022.   https://www.un.org/
pga/76/2022/08/04/opening-remarks-at-the-briefing-by-the-
secretary-general-on-the-progress-on-our-common-agenda/ .
United Nations. “Cooperation between United Nations, Regional Blocs 
Will Be Critical in Defusing Evolving Threats, Says Secretary-
General, Opening Security Council Debate.” Press release. 
February 16, 2022. Accessed July 9, 2022. Available at https://press.
un.org/en/2022/sgsm21145.doc.htm .
United Nations. “Disproportionately Affected Youth Must Be Central 
to COVID-19 Pandemic Recovery Plans, Experts Tell Security 
Council, Stressing Their Key Role as Game-Changers.” Press 
release. April 27, 2020. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://press.
un.org/en/2020/sc14170.doc.htm .
United Nations, “From Words to Action: A Global Ceasefire 
Beyond COVID-19 Pandemic.” Press Release. June 29, 2022. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://twitter.com/swiss_un/
status/1541858859752497152?s=21&t=Mra5nDfYn7rEPjlMjQdPFQ .
United Nations. “General Assembly Overwhelmingly Adopts 
Resolution Demanding Russian Federation Immediately End 
Illegal Use of Force in Ukraine, Withdraw All Troops.” Press 
Release. March 2, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://press.
un.org/en/2022/ga12407.doc.htm .
United Nations. “General Assembly: Briefing to Member States on 
the Declaration on Future Generations”, June 30, 2022. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. https://media.un.org/en/asset/k1w/k1w1ug7klk .
United Nations. “Perpetrators of Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict 
Must Be Brought to Justice, Security Council Delegates Demand 
amid Calls for Explicit Sanctions Criteria.” Press release. August 
11, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://press.un.org/
en/2022/sc14860.doc.htm .
United Nations. “Secretary-General, Addressing Peacebuilding 
Commission, Says New Agenda for Peace ‘Is Our Platform 
to Update Promise’ of Saving Future Generations from War.” 
October 22, 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://press.
un.org/en/2021/sgsm20985.doc.htm .
United Nations. “Secretary-General’s Remarks at the Meeting of the 
Peacebuilding Commission: ‘Our Common Agenda and the New 
Agenda for Peace’ [as Delivered] | United Nations Secretary-
General.” Last modified October 22, 2021. Accessed August 5, 
2022. https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/statement/2021-10-22/
secretary-generals-remarks-the-meeting-of-the-peacebuilding-
commission-%E2%80%9Cour-common-agenda-and-the-new-
agenda-for-peace%E2%80%9D-delivered .
80
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY United Nations. “Secretary-General’s Report on ‘Our Common 
Agenda.’” Last modified 2022. Accessed August 5, 2022. https://
www.un.org/en/content/common-agenda-report/#download . 
United Nations. “Shaping Our Future Together: Concluding Report 
of the UN75 Office” January 2021. Accessed September 2, 2022. 
https://un75.online/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/UN75_final_
report_ShapingOurFutureTogether2.pdf .
United Nations. “The Age of Digital Interdependence.” Report of the 
UN Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation. 
June 2019. Accessed September 2, 2022.  https://www.un.org/en/
pdfs/DigitalCooperation-report-for%20web.pdf .
United Nations. “UN chief disappointed nuclear treaty 
conference ends without consensus.” August 27, 2022. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://news.un.org/
en/story/2022/08/1125572?utm_source=UN+News+-
+Newsletter&utm_campaign=6e62667748-EMAIL_
CAMPAIGN_2022_08_27_05_16&utm_medium=email&utm_
term=0_fdbf1af606-6e62667748-107312462 .
United Nations. “UN System Task Team on the Post-2015 UN 
Development Agenda.” January 2013. Accessed July 17, 2022. 
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/policy/untaskteam_
undf/thinkpieces/24_thinkpiece_global_governance.pdf .
United Nations. “World reaches ‘tragic milestone’ of one million 
COVID-19 deaths so far in 2022.” August 25, 2022. https://news.
un.org/en/story/2022/08/1125462?utm_source=UN+News+-
+Newsletter&utm_campaign=3a584eaff3-EMAIL_
CAMPAIGN_2022_08_25_07_46&utm_medium=email&utm_
term=0_fdbf1af606-3a584eaff3-107312462 .
United Nations. “Youth Strategy 2030: Working with and for Young 
People.” September 24, 2018. Accessed July 30, 2022. https://www.
un.org/youthenvoy/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/18-00080_UN-
Youth-Strategy_Web.pdf .
United Nations. General Assembly. 2005 World Summit Outcome.  A/
RES/60/1. September 16, 2005. Accessed September 2, 2022. 
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/
generalassembly/docs/globalcompact/A_RES_60_1.pdf . 
United Nations. Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational 
Uses of International Watercourses. 1997. Accessed August 
8, 2022. https://legal.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/
conventions/8_3_1997.pdf .
United Nations. Convention on the Law of the Sea. December 10, 
1982. Accessed July 28, 2022.  https://www.un.org/Depts/los/
convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf .
United Nations. General Assembly. Declaration on the commemoration 
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations . A/RES/75/1. 
NY: United Nations, September 21, 2020. Accessed September 
2, 2022.  https://www.un.org/pga/74/wp-content/uploads/
sites/99/2020/06/200625-UN75-highlight.pdf .
United Nations. “Disaster Risk Reduction Programme.” UNDP 
Pakistan, September 2020. Accessed August 9, 2022. https://www.
undp.org/pakistan/projects/disaster-risk-reduction-programme .
United Nations. General Assembly and Security Council. Peacebuilding 
and sustaining peace . Report of the Secretary-General. 
A/76/668–S/2022/66. January 28, 2022. Accessed September 
2, 2022.  https://www.un.org/peacebuilding/sites/www.un.org.
peacebuilding/files/documents/sg_report.peacebuilding_and_
sustaining_peace.a.76.668-s.2022.66.corrected.e.pdf .
United Nations. General Assembly and Security Council. Report of 
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations. [Brahimi Report.]  
A/55/305-S/2000/809. August 21, 2000.
United Nations. General Assembly. A More Secure World: Our Shared 
Responsibility . Report of the High-level Panel on Threats, 
Challenges and Change. Note by the Secretary-General. A/59/565. 
December 2, 2004. United Nations. General Assembly. Follow up to the report of the 
Secretary-General entitled “Our Common Agenda.”  A/RES/76/6. 
November, 16 2021.
United Nations. General Assembly. Informal Consultation by Co-
Facilitators for the Development of an Elements’ Paper on the 
Declaration on Future Generations. July 7, 2022. Available at https://
www.eeas.europa.eu/delegations/un-new-york/eu-statement-
informal-consultation-elements-paper-declaration-future_en?s=63 . 
United Nations. General Assembly. Modalities Resolution on the Summit 
of the Future . September 7, 2022, L.87. https://www.un.org/
pga/76/2022/09/07/letter-from-the-president-of-the-general-
assembly-oca-co-facs-results-of-silence-on-modalities/ .
United Nations. General Assembly.  The human right to a clean, 
healthy and sustainable environment . A/RES/76/300. July 26, 
2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://digitallibrary.un.org/
record/3982508?ln=en .
United Nations. General Assembly. Standing Mandate for a General 
Assembly Debate When a Veto is Cast in the Security Council.  A/
RES/76/262. April 28, 2022. https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/
UNDOC/GEN/N22/330/37/PDF/N2233037.pdf?OpenElement
United Nations. General Assembly. Resolution on the Follow-up to the 
Report of the Secretary-General Entitled “Our Common Agenda.”  
A/RES/76/6. November 12, 2021. https://digitallibrary.un.org/
record/3949888?ln=en .
United Nations. General Assembly. Road map for digital cooperation: 
implementation of the recommendations of the High-level Panel 
on Digital Cooperation . Report of the Secretary-General. May 
29, 2020. Accessed July 28, 2022. https://digitallibrary.un.org/
record/3864685 .
United Nations. General Assembly. Standing Mandate for a General 
Assembly Debate When a Veto is Cast in the Security Council.  A/
RES/76/262. April 28, 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
digitallibrary.un.org/record/3971417?ln=en .
United Nations. General Assembly. Transforming our world: The 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development.  A/RES/70/1. October 21, 2015. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda .
United Nations. “Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on 
Technology.” Accessed 28 August 2022. https://www.un.org/
techenvoy/global-digital-compact .
United Nations. Report of High-Level Independent Panel on UN Peace 
Operations: Uniting Our Strengths for Peace-Politics, Partnership, 
and People . [HIPPO Report.] 2015. Accessed September 2, 2022. 
https://www.globalr2p.org/resources/report-of-the-high-level-
independent-panel-on-peace-operations-on-uniting-our-
strengths-for-peace-politics-partnership-and-people/ .
United Nations. Report of the Advisory Group of Experts for the 2015 
Review of The United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture . June 
2015. Accessed July 16, 2022. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/
challenge-sustaining-peace-report-advisory-group-experts-2015-
review-united-nations .
United Nations. Secretary General. “Inclusive, Networked 
Multilateralism Vital for Better World Governance, Says 
Secretary-General, at General Assembly’s Seventy-Fifth 
Anniversary Meeting.” Press release. September 21, 2020. 
Accessed August 7, 2022. https://www.un.org/press/en/2020/
sgsm20264.doc.htm .
United Nations. Secretary-General. “Secretary-General’s High-Level 
Advisory Board on Mediation.” September 13, 2017. Accessed 
July 16, 2022. https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/personnel-
appointments/2017-09-13/secretary-general%E2%80%99s-high-
level-advisory-board-mediation .
United Nations. Security Council. Resolution 1325 on Women Peace 
and Security. October 31, 2000. Accessed September 2, 2022. 
https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N00/720/18/
PDF/N0072018.pdf?OpenElement .
RETHINKING GLOBAL COOPERATION: THREE NEW FRAMEWORKS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION IN AN AGE OF UNCERTAINTY 81
United Nations. Security Council. Resolution 2250. December 9, 2015. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/
doc/UNDOC/GEN/N15/413/06/PDF/N1541306.pdf?OpenElement .
United Nations. Stakeholder Consultation on the Formulation of an Elements 
Paper on the Declaration on Future Generations.  July 22, 2022. 
United Nations. Supplement to an Agenda for Peace: position paper of 
the Secretary-General on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the 
United Nations . A/50/60-S/1995/1. January 25, 1995. 
United Nations. Antarctic Treaty. December 1, 1959. United Nations 
Treaty Series , Vol. 402. No. 5778: 71-102. 
United Nations. The Future We Want, The United Nations We Need . New 
York: United Nations, September 2020. https://www.un.org/en/
un75/presskit# :~:text=Background,headed%20if%20current%20
trends%20continue . 
United Nations. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2022 . 2022. 
Accessed August 3, 2022: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2022/
The-Sustainable-Development-Goals-Report-2022.pdf .
United Nations. Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of 
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the 
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies. October 10, 1967. United Nations 
Treaty Series , Vol. 610. No. 8843: 205-301.
United Nations. UN75 Office. Resolved to Combine Our Efforts: 
Preliminary Assessment of the UN75 Survey and Dialogues . New 
York: UN, April 2020. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://www.
un.org/zh/inc/un75_update.pdf .
United Network of Young Peacebuilders and Search for Common 
Ground. “Translating Youth, Peace & Security Policy into 
Practice: A Guide to Building Coalitions.” Accessed August 
6, 2022. https://www.sfcg.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/
Translating_Youth_Peace_and_Security_Policy_into_Practice_
December_2020.pdf .
United States. “Statement at General Assembly on Our Common 
Agenda.” February 21, 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. https://
estatements.unmeetings.org/estatements/10.0010/20220221/
qblUxtUrB06g/gqVmovFVh9dN_en.pdf .
University Of Auckland. “Digital Sustainability Index.” 2022. Accessed 
July 29, 2022. https://www.auckland.ac.nz/en/business/our-
research/research-institutes-centres/centre-digital-enterprise/
our-research/digital-sustainability-index.html .
Valuch, Jozef, and Ondrej Hamuľák. “Use of Force in Cyberspace.” 
International and Comparative Law Review  20, No. 2. 2020: 171-191.
Vaskor, Mate. “The Hungarian ombudsman was downgraded by his 
foreign colleagues.” 24. Hu , May 24, 2022. Accessed September 2, 
2022. https://24.hu/belfold/2022/05/24/kozma-akos-ombudsman-
leminosites/ .
Vincent, Alice. “Ombudspersons for Future Generations: Bringing 
Intergenerational Justice into the Heart of Policymaking.” United 
Nations Chronicle , June 2012. Accessed July 19, 2022.  https://www.
un.org/en/chronicle/article/ombudspersons-future-generations-
bringing-intergenerational-justice-heart-policymaking .
Wadhwa, Vivek, and Alex Salkever. “How Elon Musk’s Starlink Got 
Battle-Tested in Ukraine.” Foreign Policy ., May 4, 2022. Accessed 
July 29, 2022. https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/05/04/starlink-
ukraine-elon-musk-satellite-Internet-broadband-drones/ .
Wales, Government of. Department for Natural Resources. Well-being 
of Future Generations (Wales) Act. 2015. Accessed September 
2, 2022.  https://www.futuregenerations.wales/wp-content/
uploads/2017/02/150623-guide-to-the-fg-act-en.pdf .
Watene, Krushil. Reimagining the Human and Environment Relationship . 
United Nations University. 2022. Accessed September 2, 2022. http://
collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU :8829/UNUUNEP_Watene_RHER.pdf .
Water, Peace and Security. “Mali.” Accessed July 4, 2022. https://
waterpeacesecurity.org/info/mali .Weiss, Thomas G., Tatiana Carayannis and Richard Jolly. “The ‘Third’ 
United Nations.” Global Governance: A Review of Multilateralism 
and International Organizations  15, No. 1. 2009: 123-142.
Wendle, John. “The Ominous Story of Syria’s climate refugees.” 
Scientific American , December 17, 2015. Accessed September 2, 
2022. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/ominous-story-
of-syria-climate-refugees/ .
West, Darrell M. “How to Combat Fake News and Disinformation.” 
Brookings Institution. December 18, 2017. Accessed July 29, 2022. 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/how-to-combat-fake-news-
and-disinformation/ .
Wezeman, Pieter D., Kuimova, Alexandra and Wezeman, Siemon 
T. “Trends in International Arms Transfers, 2021.” Stockholm 
International Peace Research Institute. 2022. Accessed September 
2, 2022. https://sipri.org/publications/2022/sipri-fact-sheets/
trends-international-arms-transfers-2021 . 
Wieke D. Pot, Art Dewulf & Catrien J.A.M. Termeer. “Governing long-
term policy problems: Dilemmas and strategies at a Dutch water 
authority.” Public Management Review  24, No. 2. 2022: 255-278.
World Bank Group. “Fact Sheet: The Indus Waters Treaty 1960 and the 
Role of the World Bank.” June 11, 2018. Last updated April 6, 2022. 
Accessed July 28, 2022. https://www.worldbank.org/en/region/sar/
brief/fact-sheet-the-indus-waters-treaty-1960-and-the-world-bank .
World Bank Group. Global Economic Prospects . June 2022. 
Accessed September 2, 2022. https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/37224/9781464818431.
pdf?sequence=10&isAllowed=y .
World Bank. “Digital Economy for Africa Initiative.” 2017. Accessed 
July 29, 2022. https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/all-africa-
digital-transformation .
World Bank. “World Bank Group Launches New Country Partnership 
Framework for the Gambia.” June 8, 2022. Accessed July 29, 2022. 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2022/05/10/
afw-world-bank-group-launches-new-country-partnership-
framework-for-the-gambia .
World Commission on Environment and Development. Our 
Common Future . 1987. Accessed September 2, 2022. https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/5987our-
common-future.pdf .
World Data Lab. “Internet Poverty Index.” Accessed July 5, 2022. 
https://Internetpoverty.io/ .
World Health Organization. “UN Report: Global Hunger Numbers 
Rose to as Many as 828 Million in 2021.” July 6, 2022. Accessed 
September 2, 2022. https://www.who.int/news/item/06-07-2022-
un-report--global-hunger-numbers-rose-to-as-many-as-828-
million-in-2021 .
Wright, Thomas. Advancing Multilateralism in a Populist Age, Brookings 
Institution. February 2021. Accessed August 9, 2022. https://
www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/FP_20210204_
multilateralism_wright_v2.pdf .
Zaller, John R. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 1992.
Zhao, Yun, and Shengli Jiang. “Armed conflict in outer space: Legal 
concept, practice and future regulatory regime.” Space Policy  48. 
2019: 50-59.
Zwitter, Andrej. “Big Data and International Relations.” Ethics & 
International Affairs . December 11, 2015. Accessed September 2, 
2022. https://www.ethicsandinternationalaffairs.org/2015/big-
data-international-relations/ .
In 2022, the growing impacts of climate change have been felt across the globe, from prolonged drought 
in the Middle East and North Africa, to erratic monsoons in South Asia and record-breaking heat waves 
in Europe and China. At the same time, the COVID-19 pandemic—which reached the tragic milestone 
of one million deaths within the first eight months of this year—and the ongoing war in Ukraine and 
other violent conflicts have impeded global progress toward the Sustainable Development Goals. To 
address these and other pressing global challenges, UN Secretary-General António Guterres called 
for, one year ago in his Our Common Agenda report, a Summit of the Future to improve collective ac -
tion worldwide. Among the summit’s anticipated outcomes are a Declaration on Future Generations, 
a Global Digital Compact, and a New Agenda for Peace. This report elaborates on the challenges, 
proposed major elements, and potential spoilers to be overcome for each of these global policy frame -
works. It further argues that meaningful civil society engagement in the summit’s preparations can 
reassure all stakeholders that decisions taken are well-informed, enjoy broad social ownership, and 
generate a sense of co-responsibility in supporting their implementation.
Other collaborative reports between the Doha Forum and Stimson Center:
Reimagining Governance in a Multipolar World (2019)
Coping with New and Old Crises: Global and Regional Cooperation  in an Age of Epidemic Uncertainty  (2020)
Building Back Together & Greener: Twenty Initiatives for a Just, Healthy, and Sustainable Global Recovery  (2021)Rethinking Global Cooperation
Three New Frameworks for Collective Action in an Age of Uncertainty
SOTF preparatory 
ministerial at the 
start of UNGARoadmap to the 2024 Summit of the Future
(recommended )
* Only select recommended activities listed.Intergovernmental (and 
Multistakeholder) Track* Civil Society-led Track  
(with UN/Government participation)*
PGA OCA 
Thematic 
Consultations 
commenced
1st of global 
policy 
frameworks 
initiatedHigh-Level  
Advisory Board  
on Effective  
Multilateralism Repor tPact for 
the Future 
negotiation 
commence sFollow-
through 
mechanisms 
establishedFEB
2022
Modalities 
Resolution 
negotiation 
finalizedSEPT  
2022 
JUNE  
2022EARLY
2023SEPT
2023FEB  
2023 
SOTF 
multiple 
instruments 
finalizedJUNE  
2023/4SEPT  
2024OCT  
2024
SEPT  
2021 
“We The Peoples” 
and “Next Gen 
Fellows” reports 
presented
SEPT  
2021 
MAR  
2022 ACUNS 
Annual 
Meeting & 
Global Policy 
Dialogue
JUNE  
2022-24OCT  
2024NOV  
2022Our Common 
Agenda  launched, 
followed by  
GA Res.
Global Policy 
Dialogue 
on Global 
Governance 
InnovationGlobal 
Futures 
Forum 
convened
MAR  
2023 & 
2024Monitor 
Follow-through 
and pursue 
“unfinished 
business”People’s Pact 
for the Future 
commenced
OCT  
2022Global People's 
Assembly convenedPREPARATION OF THE SUMMIT’S “PACT FOR THE FUTURE” OUTCOME DOCUMENT 
Global Policy 
Dialogue on the Triple 
Planetary Crisis
Civil 
Society-led 
Regional 
Futures 
Forums  
commencedMAY  
2022 Summit of  
 the Future
OCA Dialogue 
Discussion Series 
commenced
JAN  
2023SEPT  
2023 & 
2024