Submission to the Development of the Global Digital Compact 
from Stakeholders of the Caribbean Internet Governance 
Forum  
I. Introduction  
The Caribbean Telecommunications Union (CTU) Secretariat reached out to stakeholders of the 
Caribbean Internet Governance Forum (CIGF) and the Small Island Developing States Internet 
Governance Forum (SIDS IGF) to coordinate a joint input to development of  the Digital Global 
Compact of the United Nations (UN). Collaboration was undertaken through a shared document 
in the cloud and via Zoom video conferencing. Caribbean stakeholders from the Governmental, 
private sector, academia and civil society stakeholde r groups actively participated in the joint 
process so this document represents a collective Caribbean input. While Caribbean nations do 
provide a SIDS perspective, this submission is not however representative of the views of SIDS 
from other world regions .  
 
II. Thematic Areas  
Stakeholders were asked to comment on the thematic areas provided by the UN and to add 
others they deemed pertinent to the Caribbean. As requested by the UN, these thematic areas 
were then assessed based on the existing work completed o r in progress and finally the needs 
to be addressed.  
 
In considering this, stakeholders were asked to reference the  Caribbean Internet Governance 
Policy Framework  (CIGPF) which was developed by the CIGF over several years. The CIGPF seeks 
to support, guide and harmonise Internet governance activities across the Caribbean. In 
additi on, the  Digital Agenda  for Latin America and the Caribbean  (eLAC 2024) adopted in 
November 2022 by the Eighth Ministerial Conference on the Information Society in Latin 
America and the Caribbean was also referenced.  
 
Caribbean priority areas in Internet governance identified b y the CIGPF are:  
● Infrastructure for broadband connectivity  
● Internet technical infrastructure  
● Legal & regulatory frameworks and enforcement  
● Internet content  
● Public awareness and capacity building  
● Research.  
Whereas eLAC 2024 identified 4 main pillars as follows:  
● Infrastructure, connectivity and the development of skills and competencies  
● Digital economy, entrepreneurship, innovation and sustainability  
● Inclusion and the digital transformation of the State  
● Forging new partnerships re trade integration , the regional digital market and 
cooperation.  
eLAC 2024 also includes 10 specific targets for broadband penetration, service accessibility, 
digital skills and planning.   
 
Finally, other references relevant to SIDS were also noted as worthy of consideration in 
formulating our inputs to the GDC viz. the Pacific Regional e -Commerce Strategy and Roadmap 
(https://www.forumsec.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/02/Regional -Ecommerce -Strategy -
Roadmap.pdf ) and the ongoing Enhancement of Governance and Enabling Environment in the 
ICT sector (EGEE -ICT) in the Eastern Africa, Souther n Africa, and the Indian Ocean region 
(https://www.comesa.int/egee -ict-programme/ ). 
 
Using data from these references, initiatives relevant to the UN’s GDC call were identified and 
feedback prov ided in alignment with the UN’s thematic areas, while also including proposals not 
necessarily so exactly classified. It is important to note however, that these thematic areas are 
not mutually exclusive and overlap will occur. Following are the thematic a reas ultimately 
proposed and commented upon by Caribbean stakeholders:  
 
1. Connect all people to the internet, including all schools   
2. Avoid internet fragmentation   
3. Protect data   
4. Apply human rights online   
5. Introduce accountability criteria for discriminati on and misleading content   
6. Promote regulation of artificial intelligence  (ethical behavior of solutions?)  
7. Digital commons as a global public good  
8. Sustainable internet consumption/production  
9. Collaboration and Multistakeholder Participation  
10. Openness and I nteroperability  
11. Develop a Culture of Cybersecurity  
12. Embrace Universal Acceptance  
 
  III. GDC Input from Caribbean Stakeholders   
 
The following table summarises and collates the feedback provided by Caribbean stakeholders 
from the Government, private sector, academia and civil society stakeholder groups for input to 
the GDC development process.  
 
 
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
Connect all people to 
the Internet, 
including schools   
 
  Internet Exchange Points 
(IXP) are being 
implemented within 
the Caribbean to 
expand access to 
and improve the 
quality of service 
provided.  
  
IXPs exist in 18 countries 
within the 
Caribbean .  Adequate infrastructure, designed to 
be resilient, to withstand the 
environmental hazards and natural 
disasters experienced in the 
region.  
Foster the growth and development of 
all IXPs, IXP services and facilities 
in the regi on. 
The necessary devices to provide 
meaningful connectivity via both 
wired and wireless modes.  
Capacity building to enh ance digital 
skills needed to use these devices 
while also raising awareness of and 
protecting the vulnerable and 
disadvantaged in society, who are 
a large but silent percentage of the 
population.  
Note: The considerations account for 
connecting buildings a nd people 
given the specific inclusion of 
schools, a subset of all people.  
National and regional 
education platforms 
which require 
internet access be 
made available at 
schools.  Enhancing the skilled labour force to 
provide the quality of service 
needed to ensure meaningful 
connectivity by providing capacity 
building in planning,  designing and 
implementing network 
infrastructure    
Educating all potential users on safety 
measures needed to protect 
themselves and children online.  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
Digital infrastructure to provide safe 
learning environments.  
  National and regional 
universal service 
funds ( USFs)   Encourage use of the funds to provide 
equitable access to the have nots. 
Encourage the implementation of 
USFs where they don’t exist.  
Encourage detailed data collection on 
existing digital divides regionally to 
better inform policy and allocate 
resources from USFs  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
Avoid Internet 
Fragmentation    Collaboration on a regional level on 
decisions on issues like regulation.  
Facilitate measures which prevent 
differences of language from 
becoming/continuing to be break 
points.  
Lobby for our Caribbean values in 
international fora.  
Raise awareness of what is now 
considered "other" and how it 
could be useful/interesting for us  
Existing efforts 
regarding openness 
and interoperability:  
 
Caribbean Open 
Institute (COI)  
 
CARICOM Single ICT 
Space  
 
Caribbean Open Data 
Conference  Regulatory framework  
Should  support  openness and 
interoperability. This includes 
policies and regulations that 
promote open data, open 
standards, and open APIs, and that 
encourage the use of open source 
software.  
 
Awareness  
Greater awareness of the benefits of 
openness and interoperability, 
both among policymakers and the 
general public. This includes 
understanding the potential of 
open data, open source software, 
and open standards to drive 
innovation and economic growth.  
 
Investment in Capacity -building  
There needs to be investment in the 
skills and knowledge necessary to 
promote openness and 
interoperability. This includes 
training programs for government 
officials, educators, and 
entrepreneurs to help them 
understand how t o work with 
open standards and technologies.  
 
 
Infrastructure Investment  
Investment in infrastructure is 
necessary to support openness 
and interoperability. This includes 
the development of robust data 
exchange platforms, the 
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
deployment of high -speed inter net 
connectivity, and the provision of 
the necessary hardware and 
software tools to enable open 
collaboration and innovation.  
Protect Data   Data Protection Policies 
and Legislation are 
being drafted and 
enacted by various 
governments within 
the Caribbean 
region.  
At least 10 Caribbean 
territories with 
modernised data 
protection legislation 
at present  
  
  Data protection requires a 
combination of skilled workers to 
create risk mitigating 
environments, awareness of safety 
practices and the enforcement of 
laws when there are breaches. 
Digital security is key to users 
being confident in their use of 
technology. Providing 
cybersecurity requires 
collaboration, beginning with the 
creator of the technology, ending 
not with the user, but the eventual 
owner of the technology, who 
possesses the produced data.  
Capacity building is required to raise 
awareness on data and its uses 
both good and bad.  
 
  
Policy requirements not modelled 
solely around the existing 
European models or General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
compliance.  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
Apply human rights 
online   
    Policy requirements not modelled 
solely on the existing European 
models  
Consistency with current human rights 
standards and individual 
responsibilities and obligations is 
needed.  
Public awareness -raising to inform 
users of their rights online and the 
responsibilities of users to 
maintain equal rights.   
Introduce 
accountability 
criteria for 
discrimination and 
misleading content   
  The Caribbean 
Broadcasting Union 
has implemented a 
Social Media Policy 
Framework for the 
Caribbean currently 
used by two of 
fifteen media bodies 
within the region.   Internet co ntent provides a challenge 
for information management with 
regional content on popular 
platforms being less visible unless 
a tailored experience is curated. 
The misuse of hashtags to bring 
attention to unrelated content for 
‘views’ presents a challenge for  
any user attempting to source 
information. While platforms allow 
reporting of misleading content, 
the use of misleading hashtags is 
allowed due to the platform’s 
position of creators tailoring their 
viewing audience. This has led to, 
for example, videos o f Carnival in 
Canada being tagged with 
#TrinidadandTobago.  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
The creation and popularity of 
‘memes’ has led to the mass 
creation of false images under the 
guise of being jokes that contain 
false information believed by many 
to be true. To mitigate this, all 
satire content should be clearly 
labelled as such in all me dia 
formats.  
This will require regional cooperation 
due to the cross -border nature of 
the Internet by both public and 
private sectors in the content they 
produce for mass consumption.  
Promote regulation of 
artificial 
intelligence     Promote understanding of how this 
regulation will impact having a 
free and open Internet given 
concerns these two needs are in 
opposition.  
 
Protection of data generated and 
collected by artificial intelligen ce. 
Digital commons as a 
global public good   The Digital Library of the 
Caribbean  is a 
collection of 
resources on or 
about the Caribbean. 
Partners include 
regional and 
international 
libraries as well as 
private collectors.  Raise awareness of what digital 
commons are and are not, along 
with the value in shared 
knowledge.  
 
To benefit fr om them they need to be 
accessible, without breaching data 
protection laws.   
 
Free access and sustainable resource 
management will be integral in 
maintaining these digital 
commons.  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
The grouping of the Caribbean as Latin 
America and the Caribbean needs 
to be revised when there are as 
many as two Caribbean nations 
included in the dataset. The 
assumption of findings in these 
situations is often inaccurate for 
the Caribbean.  
Support nee ds to be given to the 
Caribbean nations to gather and 
update datasets to provide its own 
regional statistics that will have 
merit when placed with that of 
Latin America.    
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
Digital Transformation 
and Digital 
Economy   
  E-commerce platforms 
are available to 
multiple islands to 
allow commerce 
between islands.  Digital technologies are impacting all 
economic activities, transforming 
processes, business models, 
products and value chains. To 
maximize the impact of these 
technologies on the economy, it is 
necessary to boost their adoption 
in the productive fabric, f ocusing 
on small and medium -sized 
companies and promoting 
technology -based 
entrepreneurship  
The transformation of processes will 
include the necessary changes to 
how information is distributed to 
the public as Internet content. This 
will need to be guided  by policies 
which determine accountability for 
and classify harmful or misleading 
content.  
Legislation and regulation will need to 
be reviewed and may require 
amendments.  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
E-governments are 
becoming more 
sustainable with 
government services 
being entirely or 
partially online.  
  Fostering a regional digital market 
strategy, which reduces barriers to 
digital trade, must be part of the 
strategies of subregional 
integration mec hanisms, through a 
greater integration of digital 
infrastructure, normative 
harmonization, free flow of data, 
and facilitation of commerce and 
best logistics services, among 
others.  
Ensure that e -gover nment services are 
accessible to all  
Collaboration and 
Multistak eholder 
participation  Caribbean 
Telecommunications Union  
 
Caribbean Internet 
Governance Forum  
 
Caribbean Network 
Operators Group 
(CaribNOG)  
 
The Caribbean Open 
Institute  
 
CANTO   Limited resources  
Caribbean countries face resource 
constraints, including limited 
funding, technical expertise, and 
infrastructure. Collaborative efforts 
that bring together governments, 
private sector, civil society, 
academia, and international 
partners can pool resources , 
expertise, and best practices to 
address common challenges and 
optimize the utilization of available 
resources.  
 
Capacity Building  
This is needed to enhance the skills 
and knowledge of stakeholders in 
areas such as digital technologies, 
cybersecurity, da ta management, 
and policy development. 
Multistakeholder participation in 
capacity building initiatives can help 
build a skilled workforce, promote 
knowledge sharing, and foster 
innovation in the region.  
 
Coordination and Harmonization  
The Caribbean region consists of many 
small island states, each with its 
own unique challenges and 
opportunities. Collaborative efforts 
and multistakeholder participation 
can help in coordinating and 
harmonizing efforts across 
countries to avoid duplication of 
efforts, streaml ine processes, and 
promote regional cooperation and 
integration.  
 
Policy and Regulatory Frameworks  
Developing and implementing 
effective policy and regulatory 
frameworks for digital 
infrastructure and services require 
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
collaboration and multistakeholder 
participation. Involving relevant 
stakeholders in policy discussions, 
consultations, and decision -maki ng 
processes can help ensure that 
policies and regulations are 
inclusive, transparent, and aligned 
with the needs of different sectors 
and communities.  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
Develop a Culture of 
Cybersecurity  CARICOM Cybersecurity 
and Cybercrime Action Plan 
- CARICOM IMPACS (March 
2016)  Adoption of Regional Cybersecurity 
Strategy   
Given the marked increase in cyber 
incidents, a culture of cybersecurity 
is sine qua non for a free and 
secure digital future.  
SIDS , given their inherent constraints 
such as small populations, limited 
resources (financial and human) are 
particularly vulnerable. Noting that 
the shortage of cybersecurity 
personnel globally would be 
exacerbated in the SIDS context.  
Consideration should be given to how 
the particular vulnerabilities 
associated with small size/island 
states could be translated into 
strengths in the context of 
cybersecurity  
Build capacity among end users to 
mitigate the risks to themselves 
and others.  
Thematic Area   Existing Efforts   Needs   
Sustainable internet 
consumption/production  
  Due to the large amount of energy the 
Internet increasingly consumes in 
data centres, cloud deployments 
etc., consideration needs to be 
given to the environmental impact. 
Key areas of consideration are the 
conservation of natural resources, 
reduction in to xic materials and the 
emission of waste and pollutants 
and other environmental 
protection areas.  
There is need for public awareness of 
the potential environmental risks 
posed by current, emerging and 
future technology - especially for 
SIDS. This includes the issue of 
Radio Frequency (RF) radiation 
exposure standards and limits – 
Safety/Awareness/ 
Publ ications/Regulations.  
 
  
 
 
Collated by the Caribbean Telecommunications Union (CTU) Secretariat.  
 
 
 
28th April 2023.  
 
https://input.un.org/EFM/se/3995D1A472EC463708DB480DD61A87357E   
