 
 
 
  April 2023  
 
Global Digital Compact – Contribution by AUSTRIA   
 
As a staunch advocate and active promoter of effective multilateralism with the United 
Nations at the centre , Austria welcomes the elaboration of a Global Digital Comp act (GDC) 
as proposed in the Secretary -General's report Our Common Agenda , to be agr eed at the 
Summit of the Future in September 2024 , following a technology track involving all 
stakeholders .   
We lend our full support to the co -facilitators appointed by the President of the General 
Assembly to lead the intergovernmental process on the GDC . We also lend our full support 
to the Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology.  
Inclusivity , transparency  and partnership  
Effective multi -stakeholder governance  mechanisms  are essential for a global and non-
fragmented  Internet. In order to be effective , the GDC must be built on trust, inclus ivity  
and a multi -stakeholder  approach.  
With this in mind, the  proce ss towards a final document  must ensure meaningful multi -
stakeholder participation at every step of the way, including after the consultation phase : 
governments, the private sector including tech companies, civil society, grass -roots 
organizations, academi a, individuals  and of course women and youth , the newly 
established UN Y outh Office  and the entire United Nations system.  
To ensure inclusion and  transparency , hybrid consultation formats  shall be used as 
appropriate.  
Dedicated to effective multilateralism and as a committed UN host country, Austria fully 
advocates that the Vienna -based Organisations  with their important mandate and 
invaluable contribution to the overall performance of the United Nations system be fully  
involved in the elaboration of the GDC.  
The negotiations on the GDC shall take into account  inter alia  the views of the Internet 
Governance Forum  (IGF), the IGF Leadership Panel  and the Multi -stakeholder Advisory 
Group .  
 
 
2 of 7 The GDC shall reiterate  the definition of multi -stakeholder internet governance as agreed 
in the Tunis Agenda .  
The GDC shall  emphasize the importance of the Internet Governance Forum  as a forum for 
multi -stakeholder dialogue  on a range of matters, including on public policy issues r elated 
to key elements of Internet governance in order to foster the sustainability, robustness, 
security, stability and development of the Internet.  
Core principles and universal values  
Austria fully supports an open, stable, free, universally accessible, global, interoperable, 
reliable, secure and green Internet.   
The GDC must build on the principles of the  United Nations Charter  aiming at promoting 
peace and security , the respect for human rights and sustainable development.  It shall 
complemen t the existing  body of international law , thus strengthen global governance,  
and serve as an enabler for its implementation.   
The GDC shall aim at overcoming the digital divides  among states and within societies  inter 
alia by building on the expertise of relevant stakeholders from governments, civil society, 
the private sector and the UN system , including UNIDO.  
The GDC needs to be a high -level document , putting forth consensual principles for digital 
cooperation and govern ance. It should reaffirm existing processes such as WSIS, without 
duplicating discussions already taking place in other fora of the UN system.  
Furthermore , Austria  wishes to highlight the following  priority areas to be included  in the 
GDC.  
Human  Rights  and the Rule of Law  
A hu man rights -based approach  is part and parcel  of ensuring the rule of law  in the digital 
space.  
The GDC must aim at promoting  and fostering a value - and rules -based international order . 
It needs to put a strong emphasis on the application of international law, international 
human rights, their universality and indivisibility – as enshrined in the Universal Declaration 
on Human Rights and the  1993 Vienna Declaration and Programme of Acti on.  
 
 
 
 
3 of 7 With this in mind , the GDC  shall address and reiterate  the following points:   
• The rights that people have offline, including the right to privacy and data protection, 
must be respected and protected online  and throughout the entire process of 
developing, deploying, regulating and evaluating data -driven technologies. Any 
limitation to human rights must adhere to the overarching principles of 
legality/legitimate interest, necessity and proportionality.  
• While new  and emerging technologies offer tremendous chances, they might also cause, 
contribute to or facilitate human rights violations if they rely on non -representative data 
sets, algorithm -based programming and machine -learning processes. Their use can 
repro duce and exacerbate existing patterns of structural discrimination, 
marginalization, social inequalities, stereotypes and bias.  
• Internet governance efforts must include gender - and diversity -responsive procedures 
and regulations of safety and security  for all, particularly for all women and girls . The 
GDC must reiterate the right of all women and girls to live a life free from technology -
facilitated gender -based violence, including exploitation, abuse and harassment.  Any 
efforts must take into account the p articular vulnerability of women and girls at risk of 
or exposed to intersecting forms of discrimination.  
• It is essential  to uphold the rules -based international order  and follow a multilateral 
approach with regard to outer space activities, which also play an important role for 
digital transformation. Space communication assets are also crucial to support the 
freedom of information beyond national borders. The GDC must  address present and 
future challenges to the safety, security and sustainability of outer space activities 
based on existing international space law.  
A human  rights -based approach is closely linked  to the emerging  concept of  digital 
humanism , which is to  be understood as the pursuit of supporting people through digital 
technologies, especially artificial intelligence, and of protecting people from adverse effects 
of these technologies.  
Digital humanism  stands for the claim to describe and analyse the comp lex interplay 
between digital technology  and people, but above all for the attempt to influence this 
interplay in favour of a society that is fully committed to human rights . All decisions 
potentially affecting human rights will always have to be taken by humans  who must always 
be responsible and accountable for their decisions.  
Austria  has repeatedly  reiterated its commitment to the promotion  of digital humanism, 
inter alia  by signing the Poysdorf Declaration .  
 
 
 
4 of 7 Cyber - Cybersecurity    
Trust  in the safety of digital technologies  and of our data in genera l is essential to meet the 
GDC objectives and, at the same time, guarantee the implementation of the Sustainable 
Development Goals.  
Therefore, the GDC shall  reiterate  that the rule of law  must always be upheld regarding 
cyber activities. International law  in its entirety, thus including international human rights 
law and international humanitarian law , applies to all cyber activities. The respective 
implementation is a precondition for the maintenance of the rules -based international 
order and the promot ion of an open, secure, peaceful and accessible ICT environment.  
Moreover, the GDC shall prominently address  the challenge of cybercrime , in particular the 
forms and the extent of cybercrime to which women and structurally disadvantaged groups 
are exposed . In this respect , the important work of UNODC as the leading UN entity in 
addressing new and emerging forms of crime, and in particular the global program on 
cybercrime as well as the ongoing negotiations on a UN Cybercrime Convention  must be 
taken into a ccount.  
The GDC should also support the development and the operationalisation of existing 
confidence -building measures (CBMs) on cybersecurity at regional and international level, 
such as the OSCE’s 16 CBMs on cybersecurity.  
Rules relevant to the spreadi ng of misleading content – such as the prohibition under the 
law of state responsibility of breaches of the non -intervention rule by entities that are 
attributable to states – already exist under international law. The development of additional 
rules, intr oducing accountability criteria for discrimination and misleading content of less 
gravity, is essential.  
Disarmament  
International Law , including international humanitarian law as well as human rights law  and 
standards form the bedrock for regulations and measures concerning the lifecycle of new 
and emerging technologies. On the one hand, transparency of artificial intelligence systems 
is crucial for their acceptance and sustainability. On the other hand, human control ,  
accountability  and explicability are  the core principles on which tech business models and 
their applications must be based.  
 
 
5 of 7 In line with several calls of the Secretary -General on this issue, the GDC should call for the 
development of legally binding rules to address the legal, ethical and security challenges 
caused by the introduction of autonomy in weapons systems.  
The GDC should ensure that when it comes to the ultimate use of force, it must be human 
beings to take the difficult decision, to exert appropriate control over and to be held 
accountable for the use of weapons systems, in full compliance with International and 
International Humanitarian Law. There is a growing consensus among states for  a two-tier 
approach:  (1) The prohibition of  certain AWS where meaningful human control cannot  be 
ensured or that are unacceptable for ethical reasons  and (2) regulating other AWS. This 
approach would be technology -neutral and functional.  
Concluding remarks  
Austria is fully aware that internatio nal cooperation with the UN at the  centr e is the best 
guarantor for  peace and security , the respect for human rights and sustainable 
development.  We fully support the Declaration of the Heads of State and Government on 
the occasion of the 75th anniversary of the UN and – subsequently – the tirel ess efforts of 
the Secretary -General to strengthen multilateralism and the U nited Nations  to keep 
delivering on the promise of the UN Charter.  
With this in mind, Austria is actively engaged in the various strands for implement ing “Our 
Common Agenda” . In D ecember 2022 Austria submitted its national contribution for a New 
Agenda for Peace  and is now gladly forwarding its contribution for the elaboration of a 
Global Digital Compact . Austria  will remain committed to this forward -looking process . It 
should also be mentioned that Austria fully subscribes to the contributions submitted by 
the European Union.  
Following consultation s with Au strian stakeholder groups and as a strong supporter  of a 
multi -stakeholder approach , Austria is glad to add their input  below (Annex)  in addition to 
the Austrian  contribution . 
Annex  – Input by  Austria’s multi -stakeholder internet community  
We are convinced that a multi -stakeholder approach not only to internet  governance  but 
to global digital policy development s more broadly has substantial advantages and should 
be used, to the extent possible under international law, as the standard for developing 
international norms. Particular advantages of multi -stakeholder ism that we feel merit 
inclusion in the GDC are inclusivity, flexibility, responsiveness and transparency. The multi -
stakeholder approach is  characterized by openness, transparency, and accountability, 
 
 
6 of 7 which helps to build trust among stakeholders and enha nces the legitimacy of global digital 
policies.  
The GDC should form a new social contract for the future of the internet. This is essential 
as the internet has become a public good, a fundamental right and a driver of digitalization 
which, if harnessed cor rectly and with appropriate human rights -safeguards can support 
development in all its forms.  
We support a holistic approach to global digital policy. Digital policy is not the responsibility 
of one state or one department within a government. Digitalization with all its impacts has 
to be integrated into specialist policies, including those for netwo rk and media, economy 
and industry, education, integration, and culture, to achieve sustainable digitalization 
within a coherent policy framework. The GDC should set Member States on this course. 
Moving from various Internet policies to a cross -disciplinar y digitalization policy that 
promotes fundamental rights, innovation, and social cohesion is essential for a sustainable 
global digital development.  
Reliable data is necessary to assess digital policies.  While different indicator -based 
approaches to asse ssing national digital policy developments exist, UNESCO's "Internet 
Universality ROAM -X Indicators" (Rights, Openness, Accessibility, and Multi -stakeholder 
Participation) are exemplary in providing a comprehensive framework for assessing a 
country's state  of the internet. We therefore encourage  the uptake of selected indicators 
as yardsticks to measure progress. A particular advantage lies in the ROAM -X indicators 
policy relevance. This helps to ensure that any assessment is actionable and can lead to 
conc rete improvements in the internet ecosystem. The GDC should consider including an 
indicator -based model for assessing progress towards agreed digital (sustainable) 
development goals.  
A human rights -based approach to global digital policy -making is essenti al. In addition, 
where applicable, ethical guidelines can be useful as first steps towards in the process of 
crystallizing international legal obligations. In the area of AI, for example, the UNESCO AI 
Ethics Recommendation is the first international text on AI ethics that has a global reach 
and was created in a collaborative, inclusive, and open multi -stakeholder -based process. It 
establishes globally recognized ethical standards for AI -based technologies and applications 
that respect human rights and inte rnational law. With the commitment of 193 Member 
States, the Recommendation takes a holistic approach by defining ethical AI development 
and use as a central obligation for society, and formulating concrete action tasks in eleven 
policy areas. The Guidelin es can serve as an ethical framework which – when generalized – 
can serve global digital policy development – in addition to, and not to the exclusion of, firm 
human rights commitments.  
 
 
7 of 7 Data is not only necessary to develop sustainable global digital poli cy, but is also key to 
making good regulatory decisions. The way that data is governed across the world shapes 
power relations, the course and dynamics of sustainable development, international trade 
and foreign policy. We support a strong commitment, in t he GDC, to innovative data 
models, like data commons, and shared data spaces that empowers communities and 
individuals. This includes enhancing access to privately held data, maximizing access to open 
government data, and building on excellent proposals, l ike regional data spaces, to innovate 
how data can be connected and harnessed to achieve societal progress while safeguarding 
rights and privacy . 
The GDC should also address the challenges and possibilities of decentralized networks (like 
Mastodon), as an alternative to profit -oriented privately owned media platforms, and of 
future iteration of the internet, where virtual and augmented reality technologies merge to 
create a shared virtual space that users can access and interact with in real time 
(“metavers e”). Existing metaverse platforms are still relatively limited in scope compared 
to the vision of a fully -realized metaverse. They are usually standalone experiences with 
their own rules, economies, and user bases, rather than a seamless, interconnected vi rtual 
universe that anyone can access and interact with in a unified way. The GDC should consider 
which values and rules should apply in fully immersive virtual worlds as spaces that blur the 
lines between the physical and digital worlds.  
The GDC should also include the importance of aligning private orders with public values 
through the inclusion of a variety of voices in the internal decision -making process, 
especially regarding the interaction of rules and algorithmic recommender systems .  