 
 
 
Contribution to the Global Digital Compact  
 
Submission to the Thematic Area “Digital commons as a global public good”: 
A systematic, whole -of-society approach to digital security.  
 
For years, the international development community has put great efforts into digitalization as an opportunity 
to fight poverty. Like the revolutions that preceded it, the Fourth Industrial Revolution has the potential to raise 
global income levels and imp rove the quality of life for populations around the world. However, digitalization 
also provides a new breeding ground for organized crime. Thus, a new dimension of social vulnerability follows 
in the wake of the development opportunities offered by the di gital revolution. In order to be sustainable, digital 
development must be done with a focus on digital security.  
 
As more people and devices are connected, the risks that come with cyber insecurity will only increase. While 
significant past efforts have i mproved our risk posture, viable solutions are typically only available at a high cost, 
thus reserved to larger companies and the wealthiest governments. Cyber is a constitutive element of our 
societies - its physical, economic, social, and political eleme nts - and its security is essential to equitable and 
inclusive economic and social development and to the protection of human rights, yet while plenty of initiatives 
are available to industry, citizens are often left behind and ill -equipped to ensure their  online safety. Because of 
its essential role, cybersecurity should be managed as a global public good.  
 
This submission calls for a whole -of-society approach to addressing the cybersecurity needs of all segments of 
society and leverage existing best prac tices, efforts, tools, and solutions to respond and mitigate against growing 
cybersecurity threats.  
 
Core principle that all governments, civil society organizations, and other stakeholders should adhere to:  
 
Equip all segments of society with skills and affordable, action -oriented, easy -to-follow steps and easy -to-
implement solutions to stay safe online.  
 
 
Key commitments to bring about these specific principles.  
Fund cybersecurity education programmes in sch ools and at the community level  
The young generation, despite being digital natives, does not follow cybersecurity best practices. This trend is 
likely to continue unless cybersecurity training begins at an early age. Cybersecurity should be a part of the 
regular school curriculum and supported by public -private partnerships as the private sector has a responsibility 
to ensure that its future customers can use its products and services safely.   
 
Promote cyber tools for all Internet users.  
Ensure that citiz ens and businesses, whatever their situation and sector of activity, are not only aware of 
cybersecurity best practices, but have access to solutions and actually adopt and implement them. To do so, 
solutions need to be relevant, localized, affordable, and  easily accessible. Governments and non -profits offer 
useful toolkits around the world. Support these stakeholders, promote existing initiatives, and encourage 
cooperation.  
 
 
 
  
2 
April 2023   
 
What our coalition has already committed to do  
In April 2022, Craig Newmark Ph ilanthropies announced a commitment of more than $ 50 million to support a 
broad coalition of organizations dedicated to a Cyber Civil Defense  initiative. That coalition of entities is calling 
for a whole -of-society response to the escalating volume and so phistication of cyber -attacks.  
 
There is consensus that a whole -of-society effort is required to address the challenges that cyber insecurity 
poses to economic development and equity. Cybersecurity needs to be inclusive. Different groups face different 
issues and have specific needs and requirements with respect to cybersecurity. In a whole -of-society approach, 
we must ensure that all needs, including those of underserved communities around the world, are represented 
and addressed.  
 
Education and Skills  
There’s no denying the world is facing a cybersecurity skills gap. The coalition is committed to provide skills 
building for those who are not able to participate in certification programs and focus on the “skills to build”, in 
addition to the current “cer tification to get” approach. More efforts should be dedicated to the mutual 
recognition of skills. Without that, cross -border cooperation and mobility remain challenging.  
 
Tools and Services  
In the whole -of-society, not every entity has the tools and ser vices it needs to fulfil its responsibilities. The 
coalition committed to ensure that solutions are available and work at a global scale. The Global Cyber Alliance 
is launching a cybersecurity taxonomy project framed as a community -based initiative to iden tify all 
cybersecurity risks in the Internet infrastructure and at the end user level. The project aims to identify all current 
tools and solutions that address known cyber risks and provide the basis for community collaboration to identify 
gaps. The proje ct will drive community collaboration and concerted action to develop tools and solutions that 
address those gaps and enable communities to protect themselves from cyber -risks.  
 
Awareness  
Building a community and working together to solve cyber insecurity is one aspect. The Global Cyber Alliance is 
committed to do everything possible to ensure awareness and usability of solutions, tools, and services, and 
meet the audiences where they are, and not expect greater expertise or commitment of resources than can 
reasonably be required in today’s difficult environment.  
 
Resourcing  
The fight against cybercrime has so far received more resources than preventive cybersecurity and resilience. 
The fo cus of funding, whether from governments, the philanthropic community, or private sector investments, 
will determine whether tools and solutions for infrastructure operators and all user communities, including the 
most vulnerable, can be made available and  accessible. Non -profit organizations, even those that provide 
essential services for the operation of the Internet, find obtaining resources for operations quite challenging. 
The coalition committed to call for a sustainable funding plan for cybersecurity , one that federates the necessary 
resources from funding to tools and human expertise to enable people - all people - to be protected.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 