 
 
The International Digital Health & AI Research Collaborative (I -DAIR)  
 
Submission to the Global Digital Compact 2023  
 
Methodology for consultation  
During the Science Summit at UNGA77  on the 22nd September 2022 , I-DAIR and its  global 
partners from the United Nations University Institute in Macau (UNU Macau), Indraprastha 
Institute of Information Technology Delhi (IIIT -Delhi), Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do 
Sul (UFRGS), the Africa -Canada AI and & Data Innovation Consortium  (ACADIC) led by York 
University and the University of the Witwatersrand, and the City University of New York 
(CUNY) conducted a  hybrid (both online and in -person)  session  to explore how collaborative 
research in AI for health can be established and sustained, as well as how technology can 
help to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in particular overcome pressing 
global health challenge s to achieve healthy liv es and well -being for all.  
The session was divided into two discussions. The first panel “Promoting collaborative 
research in AI for health” looked  at means to level the playing field so as to promot e 
collaboration , inclusivity and transdisciplinarity in research to foster responsible development 
and deployment of AI in health with contextualized and unbiased technology that can ensure 
human agency over AI in the long run. The second panel “State of the art in AI for health” 
explore d how to leverage technology to overcome pressing global health challenges , namely 
anti-microbial resistance, outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases, cardiovascular diseases, 
and environmental changes. This pan el also  examined  how AI can help cut across scientific 
silos to promote a holistic approach to solving these challenges.  
 
Each panel discussion was preceded by short presentations from invited experts on the topic 
to be discussed, and followed by a question -and-answer session with interactive polls . The list 
of invited experts included: 1) Dr. Christoph Benn – Chair, I -DAIR Board (Switzerland); 2) USG 
Amandeep Singh Gill – Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology (United Nations); 3)  Prof. 
Anurag Agrawal – Dean, Biosciences and Health Research, Trivedi School of Biosciences, 
Ashoka University (India); 4) Dr. Sathy Rajasekharan – Co-Executive Director, Jacaranda 
Health (Kenya); 5) Dr. Dominique Charron – Vice-President, Programs and Pa rtnerships, IDRC 
(Canada); 6) Dr. Soumya Swaminathan – Chief Scientist, World Health Organization 
(Switzerland); 7) Mr. Jake Okechukwu Effoduh – Chief Counsel, ACADIC (Canada/Nigeria);  8) 
Prof. Bruce Mellado – University of the Witwatersrand (South Africa) ; 9) Prof. Bruce Lee – 
Executive Director, Center for Advanced Technology and Communication in Health (CATCH), 
CUNY School of Public Health (USA) ; 10) Prof. Carisi Polanczyk – Professor of Medicine, 
UFRGS (Brazil) ; 11) Dr. Serge Stinckwich – Head of Resear ch, UNU -Macau (United Nations) ; 
12) Dr. Peiling Yap – Chief Scientist, I -DAIR (Switzerland) ; and 13) Dr. Stefan Germann – CEO, 
Fondation Botnar (Switzerland).  
 
The session was attended by  about 1 15 people either in -person or online, and about 80 entities  
were represented.  Stakeholder groups present included representatives from government 
international organizations, research and academia, as well as civil society , resulting in a rich 
dialogue reflecting diverse perspectives. The in-person  session  was audio recorded and 
 
transcribed , while online exchanges were also noted. With this submission  to the Global Digital 
Compact , I-DAIR is sharing  key highlights and  collective views put forth during the session for 
the thematic area s of digital commons as  a global public good  and advancing responsible AI 
in health  research . 
 
 
Thematic areas  
 
Digital commons as a global public good  
 
Core principles that all governments, companies, civil society organizations, and other 
stakeholders should adhere to:  
• In order to solve global challenges, namely in health, climate change and food security, 
that no single country can tackle alone, we need coalitions of the willing so that 
countries can pool resources and investments to maximize opportunities and address 
significant risks collectively.  
• Digital technologies, including AI, have been seen as potential solutions for global 
challenges  but they have to be utilized in a thoughtful manner and be seen as enablers 
rather than taking over the agency of humans.  
• The development of digital commons has to be  underpinned by science and  done  
through a multi -stakeholder collaboration involving gove rnments, philanthropic 
foundations, academia, private sector, international organizations and civil society .  
• Development of digital commons should focus on leveling the playing field  and not 
leaving any country behind , in particular, ensure access and usa ge of these public 
goods by low -and-middle income countries  (LMICs)  and not further widen the current 
digital divide.  
• Value derived from the digital commons should be brought back to all countries in a 
fair and equitable manner.  
 
Key commitments, pledges or actions to be taken to bring about the core principles : 
• Urgent need for countries to invest in digital public infrastructure, not just in the 
hardware and software but also in the governance of these infrastructure s.  
• Governments a nd the private sector should invest in providing network access to their 
citizens regardless of where they live.     
• Efforts should be made to ensure robust data systems exist in LMICs so that their 
needs and challenges can be captured and addressed through the digital commons.  
• By ensuring t ransition from connectivity to digital public goods, to digital public 
infrastru cture and finally to unbiased as well as trusted  data systems  and AI commons , 
where governance is there by design,  we lay the ground  responsibly  for AI to benefit a 
wider population.  
• Establishing a solidarity of purpose, trust and transparency between all stakeholders , 
who are  contributing and accessing the digital commons , to encourage global 
collaboration and breaking of  silos across disciplines and sectors.  
• Expertise from LMICs is currently insufficiently represented at global decision -making  
processes and more commitments should be made to increase capacity and 
opportunities for them to be at the table and create change.  
 
 
Advancing responsible AI in health  research   
 
Core principles that all governments, companies, civil society organizations, and other 
stakeholders should adhere to:  
• Tackling global health challenges as one requires transdisciplinary collaboration 
across research domains as well as between health and non -health sectors. It also 
requires systems thinking  and for re searchers, citizens and policy makers to have the 
SDGs as their common agenda.  
• It is essential for decision -makers, be they individual citizens or governments, to have 
agency and be significantly participating and engaged in AI in health research so that 
the research can be trusted and better positioned to address societal needs and 
challenges.  
• To encourage citizen science in AI in health research, there has to be bi -directional 
exchanges, transparency and communication on what the research and algorithms are 
doing in laymen terms . Researchers have to go beyond simply asking for data from 
citizen s. 
• Key ethical principles around AI in health research include fairness, accountability , 
legal responsibility, privacy  and transparency,  
• Ethical guidelines should be  implementable and be  viewed as the starting point where 
responsible AI research has to be  built up on , and not as the endpoint . 
• For LMICs to build on and benefit from the tools and technologies developed by global 
AI research ecosystems, there is a need for a paradigm shift from “adaptation” to “local 
production”.  
 
Key commitments, pledges or actions to be taken to bring about the core principles:  
• Current capacities to conduct AI in health research is uneven across the globe and 
investments should be made to allow researchers in LMICs to gain capacity, resources 
and networks to lead global collaborations.  
• In order to overcome the huge global divide, in terms of resources, capabilities and 
research outputs, in AI in health research, i t is important to invest and build hyperlocal 
AI research capabilities  and infrastructure  so that the d ata curated and models 
developed and  implemented  are attuned to local contexts.  
• In order to reduce social biases existing in current datasets and algorithms , it is 
essential for multidisciplinary/transdisciplinary collaboration to take place between 
scienc e and humanities, with social sciences being a critical part in developing the  data 
systems and  AI we use for healt h.  
• Newer architectures of machine learning, such as federated systems, hold promise for 
multi -system stakeholders to collaborate together while preserving data privacy by 
linking algorithms as well as parameters and not data.  
• Integration of machine learning approaches with traditional modeling approaches, 
such as epidemiological models, would embrace the complementary strengths of both 
approaches and there is a need to train researchers who are fluent in both.  
• Given that health issues are composed of  complex system s, ranging from biological, 
behavioral, environmental  to economic, it is essential  to adopt the system approach  
 
and develop models , such as agent -based and network models,  that incorporate  all 
these factors to truly simulate what  is happening in our societies.  
• Participatory approaches that are useful for AI research should be developed to allow 
for non -technical individuals, including marginalized populations, to be engaged 
throughout the r esearch  lifecycle . 
 
 