        G77 and China inputs to the Glo bal Digital Compact 
discussions  
 
1. The Group emphasizes that the Global Digital Compact  (GDC)  must 
be a States -led process and ensure full and equal participation of all 
States , especially developing countries.   
 
2. For the Group, the important issues pertaining to digital cooperation 
remain an inclusive digital economy and literacy, access to digita l 
networks and connectivity, capacity building and technology 
transfer, investment in digital infrastructures, data protection, data 
governance , artificial intelligence, avoiding Internet division and 
fragmentation, countering the proliferation of di sinfor mation and 
misinformation  and to outline shared principles for a digital future 
for all to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable D evelopment .  
 
3. The Global Digital Compact should  build upon key documents and 
forums to advance digital cooperation, inter alia, the World Summit 
on the Information Society ( WSIS ), in particular the Tunis Agenda 
and the Geneva Plan of Action, the Internet Governance Forum, and  
take into account  the Secre tary-General Roadmap for Digital 
Cooperation .  
 
4. In order to secure meaningful results,  the Global Digital Compact 
should outline concrete actions and specific initiatives to harness 
digital technologies to accelerate the achievement of the Sustainable 
Deve lopment Goals (SDGs).   
 
5. We emphasize the importance of ensuring synergies and avoiding 
duplication across various entities working on digital cooperation. 
To this end, the Group would like to draw attention to other 
important existing platforms for enhanci ng digital cooperation, such 
as the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the WSIS, the 
Internet Governance Forum, the STI Forum under the ECOSOC, 

and the Commission on Science, Technology, Development 
(CSTD) .  
 
6. In this regard, we recognize the role  of the Commission on Science 
and Technology for Development as the United Nations focal point 
for science, technology and innovation for development, as well as 
the focal point in the system -wide follow -up to the outcomes of the 
World Summit on the Inform ation Society (WSIS). The negotiations 
around the Global Digital Compact should not diminish the role of 
the CSTD .  
 
7. We note the multilateral and regional initiatives aimed at promoting 
social prosperity through inclusive participation across the digital 
economy including  inter alia  the establishment of the Digital 
Cooperation Organization .  
 
8. The Group underscores that the outcomes of the WSIS should be 
preserved as  a guide for digital international cooperation and for 
Internet governance, since it is based on principles that favor 
development.  
 
9. The Tunis Agenda  and the Geneva Declaration of Principles and 
plan of action shall lay down the guiding principles for the 
development of  any new mechanism on digital cooperation , 
including GDC.  
 
10. We underline the need to focus on capacity -development policies 
and sustainable support to further enhance the impact of activities 
and initiatives at the national and local levels aim ed at providing 
advice, services and support, with a view to building an inclusive, 
people -centered and developme nt-oriented information society.  
 
11. We recognize that no single country or stakeholder , or a small group 
thereof, should be allowed to monopolize or control the Internet core 
infrastructure . 
 
12. States which have monopoly and dominance in ICT environment, 
including internet, shall not use ICT advances as tools for 
containment and suppression of the legitimate economic and 
technological devel opment of other States. The GDC should 
reaffirm its firm rejection of the imposition of laws and regulations 
with extraterritorial impact and all other forms of coercive economic 
measures, including unilateral sanctions, against developing 
countries and re iterate the urgent need to eliminate them 
immediately. The GDC should emphasize  that such actions not only 
undermine the principles enshrined in the Charter of the UN and 
international law but also severely threaten the freedom of trade and 
investment. The GDC should therefore call upon the international 
community to adopt urgent and effective measures to eliminate the 
use of unilateral coercive economic measures against developing 
countries. The call to maintain an open, stable and resilient supply 
chain of global ICT products and services by GDC is necessary.   
 
13. The Global Digital Compact should reaffirm the right to 
development .  
 
14. Private sector and social media platforms should observe rules, 
norms and policies of the countries where they operate and should 
be also accountable for their behavior in ICT environme nt. States 
may, as appropriate , also consider ways and means to hold them 
responsible, ensure appropriate measures with a view to making 
private sector with extra -territorial impacts, including platforms, 
accountable for their behavior in the ICT environment, and exercise 
due control ov er ICT companies and platforms under their 
jurisdiction . 
 
15. As regards  the “multistakeholder” concept developed by Tunis 
Agenda, there is a strong need that stakeholders observ e national 
laws, regulations, principles, rules and norms for their responsible 
behavior in ICT environment.  
 
16. The Compact  should emphasize  the importance of adher ing to the 
fundamental principles of international law, and the purposes  and 
principles  of the Charter of the United Nations .  
 
17. The Global Digital Compact should reiterate  that the Internet should 
be open, secure, inclusive, accessible and interoperable.  
 
18. Expressing that WSIS Vision to bridge the digital divide s remains 
unfulfilled, the GDC  should provide a new impetus into intern ational 
cooperation to bridge those divides.  
 
19. We underline that the impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic have 
exacerbated long-standing  inequalities magnified by the digital 
divides with the risk of these becoming the new face of the 
development divide. The lack of internet access is most prevalent in 
developing countries, t herefore, it is imperative that, through the 
GDC, we enhance international cooperation and accelerate the pace 
of efforts aimed at bridging the digital divides, to help stop and roll 
back reversals in and turbocharge the realization of the SDGs.   
 
20. We further underline that even those that are currently connected, 
often have devices with inadequate capacity or slow connectivity, and 
cannot afford the prices set by service providers  which  prevents 
having a continuous and meaningful connectivity to the Internet. 
Therefore,  we shall strive for a level of connectivity that allows users 
to have a safe, satisfying, enriching and productive online experience 
at an affordable cost.  Connecting the  unconnected who are 
concentrated in developing countries is a global responsibility that 
requires commitment from all relevant stakeholders.  
 
21. We recogniz e that information and communications technologies 
present new opportunities and challenges and that there is a pressing 
need to address the major impediments that developing countries face 
in accessing new technologies, and stress the need to close the dig ital 
divides, both between and within countries and including the rural -
urban, youth -older persons and gender digital divides, and to harness 
information and communications technologies for development, and 
recalling the need to emphasize quality of access  to bridge digital and 
knowledge divides, using a multidimensional approach that includes 
speed, stability, affordability, language, training, capacity -building, 
local content and accessibility for persons with disabilities . 
 
22. We note with great concern the  fact that a gender digital divide 
persists in women’s access to and use of information and 
communications technologies, including in education, employment 
and other areas of economic and social development, and in this 
regard the Global Digital Compact should aim to promote equal 
participation of  women and girls in the digital age.  
 
23. We reaffirm the commitment of ensuring women’s full, equal and 
meaningful participation in decision -making processes related to 
information and communications technologies, in cluding policies and 
approaches to promote women’s online safety to facilitate their 
participation in the digital world, and to address any potential 
negative impacts of digital technologies on the achievement of gender 
equality and the empowerment of  all women and girls, and 
committing to eliminating, preventing and responding to all forms of 
violence against women and girls.  
 
24. The GDC should promote the preservation of Indigenous People’s 
cultures, traditions and knowledge, and address those in most 
vulne rable situations, including persons with  disabilities and older 
persons.  
 
25. The Compact should call for resilient , affordable , and accessible 
digital infrastructure , including minimu m digital public infrastructure  
for digital inclusion  and connectivity for all . It should encourage 
investments to improve capacity of infrastructure to address 
imbalances of connectivity between rural and urban areas of 
developing countries.   
 
26. The Compact should e ncourage research and development, and the 
development of viable strategies that could result in further 
competitiveness, investment and rapid reductions in the cost of 
information and commun ications technologies, and urge  all relevant 
stakeholders to address the growing digital divides between and 
within countries through, inter alia, strengthened enabling policy 
environments at all levels, legal and regulatory frameworks 
conducive to increased investment and innovation, public -private 
partnerships, universal access strategies and international coop eration 
to improve affordability, education, capacity -building, 
multilingualism, cultural preservation, investment a nd technology 
transfer.  
 
27. The Global Digital Compact should recognize the detrimental effects 
of the unilateral coercive measures against developing countries to 
their ability to connect to the Internet, therefore impeding their  
peoples from the benefits and potentials that the Internet offers , and 
that it is important to avoid politicization of technical issues to foster 
an open, fair, incl usive, and non -discriminatory environment for the 
development of digital technologies in developing countries.  
 
28. The C ompact should guarantee  that no restrictions are imposed on 
developing countries’ access to ICT materials, equipment and 
technology in ord er to maintain sustainable development.   
 
29. The GDC should emphasize that all geographic areas should have 
adequate infrastructure for information traffic.   
 
30. We also recognize the importance of assisting developing countries, 
to address the challenges and opportunities in relation to the use of 
the Internet and e -commerce to develop their international trade 
capacities, among other things.  
 
31. The GDC should r ecognize that a lack of access to affordable and 
reliable technologies and services remains a critical challenge in 
many developing countries, in particular African countries, the least 
developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island 
developing States, middle -income countries, countries in situations of 
conflict, post -conflict countries and countries affected by natural 
disasters, and that all efforts should be deployed to reduce the price 
of information and communications technologies an d broadband 
access, bearing in mind that deliberate interventions, including 
through research and development and technology transfer may be 
necessary to spur the development of lower -cost connectivity options.  
 
32. A dedicated international mechanism on techn ology development and 
transfer for the developing countries  is required to ensure that 
developing countries are also able to harness the benefits offered by 
advances in science and technology on equal footing  with the 
developed world.  The GDC should aim at  strengthening assistance 
from developed countries to developing countries. A special 
emphasis needs to be placed towards supporting R&D and innovation 
ecosystem s in developing countries.   
 
33. International Financial Institutions  and other investment partners  
need to engage for provision of long term and low -interest funds for 
digital infrastructure development in developing countries.   
 
34. We emphasize that the Global Digital Compact must focus on the 
pressing need to address the major structural impediments tha t 
developing countries face in engaging with and accessing new and 
emerging technologies.   
 
35. The Global Digital Compact should use a people -centered approach, 
make global digital development more equitable, effective and 
beneficial to all so as to leave no  country and no one behind, and 
should acknowledge the importance of facilitating  access to 
environmentally sound technologies.   
 
36. We further recognize the importance of cooperating with and 
providing support , including financial and technological, to 
developing countries, in addressing their constraints for accessing 
new and emerging ICT and services and for the integration thereof 
into different sectors, such as government services, agriculture, 
education, health, finance, transport, etc., so as to bo ost productivity 
growth and reduce inequalities, and ensur ing broadband connectivity 
to users in rural and remote areas.  
 
37. Enhanced international cooperation to help developing countries to 
bridge the digital divides should take into account the specific n eeds 
and condition s of recipient countries and be attuned to national 
sustainable development strategies, plans, policies and priorities.   
 
38. Financing development cooperation through unearmarked, flexible 
resources is key for the promotion of national ownership, alignment 
with national priorities, as well as to leave no one behind and reach 
the furthest behind first, in the context of efforts to bridge the digital 
divides.   
 
39. In this endeavor, all forms of cooperation, including South -South and 
triangula r, should be tapped  into to help constitute and support 
networks of training, and sharing of successful experiences and good 
practices.   
 
40. The Compact should e ncourage the promotion of digital solutions 
through access to and use of digital public goods, whi ch may include 
open -source software, open data, open artificial intelligence models, 
open standards and open content that adhere to international and 
domestic laws, in unlocking the full potential of rapid technological 
change to achieve the Sustainable De velopment Goals .  
 
41. We acknowledge that any consideration of tax measures in response 
to the digital economy should include a careful analysis of the 
implications for developing countries, taking into account their 
inputs, with a special focus on their uniq ue needs and capacities. We 
call upon the United Nations, and all other relevant international 
organizations, to support countries, particularly developing countries, 
in building policy and administrative capacity for the effective and 
efficient tax ation o f the digital economy.   
 
42. Internet governance should be addressed in a global setup, backed by 
the UN system , through extensive participation of all S tates with a 
multi -stakeholder  approach as set out  in the WSIS outcomes .  
 
43. The C ompact should r eaffirm that Internet governance, including the 
process towards enhanced cooperation should continue to follow the 
provisions set forth in the outcomes of the summits held in Geneva 
and Tunis .  
 
44. The GDC should acknowledge the relevance of the contributions of 
the Internet Governance Forum on public policy issues relating to the 
Internet.   
 
45. The Compact should ensure  in a more transparent and effective  
manner  the maximized participation of developing count ries, 
including their stakeholders , to provid e them with the opportunity to 
reflect their interests in policy and decision -making process es relating 
to Internet governance, in accordance with paragraph s 65 and 68 of 
the Tunis Agenda.   
 
46. The G DC should commit to multilateral democratic and transparent 
approaches to di gital governance to facilitate a more just, equitable 
and effective governance system .  
 
47. The GDC should  promote technical assistance and cooperation to 
enable all States  acquire the necessary capabilities and tools for equal 
and effective participation in Internet governance.  
 
48. We also recognize the importance of enhanced cooperation to enable 
Governments, on an equal footing, to carry out their roles and 
responsibilities in international public policy issues pertaining to the 
Internet.  
 
49. We further recogniz e the need to strengthen regional cooperation 
processes towards the harmonization of digital policy frameworks.   
 
50. The Compact should recall that under para 34 and 35 of Tunis 
Agenda, Internet Governance involves public policy and technical 
issues as well as multi stakeholder participation , each within their 
respective roles and responsibilities , for the development and 
applications of norms, principles, rules, decisions and programmes 
that shape the evolution of the I nternet.   
 
51. The GDC should emphasize the importance of preserving and 
promoting the  unity and  interoperability of the I nternet  and avoid ing 
its fragmentation. In this connection, the GDC should recogniz e and 
further promote  standardization and harmonization efforts at the 
regional and global levels . 
 
52. The GDC should reaffirm  the sovereign right of States to determine 
their national rules for Internet usage  and their prerogative to govern 
the digital sphere  within their jurisdiction, in conformity with 
international law.    
 
53. Data is becoming an increasingly important economic and strategic 
resource. It can generate significant social value for development  as 
well as  new economic opportunities and higher productivity and 
growth . If well managed, data can help to overcome some global 
development challenges .  
 
54.  Currently, there is no multilaterally agreed approach on data 
governance. The GDC should draw attention to the importance of 
multilateral spaces to further address data governance 
issues,  including through greater cooperation and harmonization.   
 
55. The GDC should encourage the relevant UN agencies and multilateral 
efforts in the formulation of international rules on data governance 
and protection reflecting the views and interests of all countries.  
 
56. The GDC should encourage efforts to address the potential harms and 
negative impacts of the misuse of data.  
 
57. The GDC should recognize  that there is a need to strengthen 
international cooperation to enable cross -border data flows to 
maximize development gains . There is an urgent need to de velop a 
common  approach to global data flows  that work for both people and 
the planet.   
 
58. The GDC should recognize the need to address the multiple 
challenges in the use of data, such as the growing digital divide, 
including the data divide; the lack of relevant skills and  capacities and 
disparate international legal and regulatory frameworks  and incipient 
domestic legal and regulatory framework s. 
 
59. Dealing with data and associated opportunities and challenges will 
require a global response, with the equal  participation of  all countries . 
 
60. The GDC should boost enhanced international cooperation, including 
technology transfer, knowledge and expertise sharing, capacity 
building, technical assistance, and educational and professional 
training and correlated res ources, so that developing countries can 
share in the social and economic benefits of the data economy and are 
equipped to effectively regulate data protection, use, and flows in the 
face of rapid technological change.   
 
61. We emphasize that the growing trend of misinformat ion and 
disinformation on online platforms, is exacerbating social discord,  
discrimination, and hate speech . The Compact should highlight the 
global concerns about the rapid spread and proliferation of 
disinformation, the need for the dissemination of factual, timely, 
clear, accessible, multilingual and evidence -based information, and 
the need for all relevant stakeholders to address the challenge of 
misinformation and disinformation.   
 
62. We note the challenge s faced by States in preventing and combating 
the use of information and communications technologies for criminal 
purposes, and emphasizing the need to continue international 
cooperation in this regard and to reinforce technical assistance and 
capacity -building activities, at their request, for the prevention, 
prosecution and punishment of such use in accordance with national 
and international law. We note with appreciation the progress of the 
work of the Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a Comprehensive 
Intern ational Convention on Countering the Use of Information and 
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes, and encourage 
Member States to continue to engage in the work of the Ad Hoc 
Committee, and further encourages the participation of relevant 
stake holders, in line with the road map and mode of work of the Ad 
Hoc Committee approved at its first session.  
 
63. Security, safety and stability of I nternet must be maintained , without 
jeopardizing efforts to achieve sustainable development . International 
cooperation through strengthening multilateralism in this area is 
highly important.  
 
64. The GDC should avoid duplicating the work of the Open -ended 
Working Group on security of and in the use of information and 
communications technologies.   
 
65. The Compact can explore the possibility  for development of norms, 
principles  and regulatory standards on the use of AI to achieve  and 
accelerate  sustainable development with the effective participation of 
developing countries  while also recognizing the nee d for assistance 
in capacity building in those countries.  
 
66. We stress that the use of artificial intelligence in the field of 
information and communication technologies should  take into 
account as appropriate  the Declaration of Principles of the World 
Summi t on the Information Society (WSIS) . 
 
67. The GDC should r ecognize the need to harness the potential of 
information an d communications technologies, frontier technologies 
and new and emerging technologies  as critical enablers of sustainable 
development and to overcome digital divides, and stres s that capacity -
building for developing countries for the productive use of such 
technologies should be given due consideration in the implementation 
of the 2030 Age nda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third 
International Conference on Financing for Development . 
 
68. The GDC should consider and evaluate the need for an enhanced 
international technology framework  more aligned with the SDGs, 
which could inter alia f ocus on offering preferential access for 
developing countries to relevant advanced technologies, developing 
their productive capacities, ending discriminatory restrictions and 
promoting global research and development of scientific 
breakthroughs relevant t o the 17 SDGs.   
 
69. The GDC should r ecogniz e also that harnessing the benefits of digital 
technologies for inclusive, equitable and quality education and 
lifelong learning opportunities requires the advancement of 
connectivity, capacities and content, and acknowledging the need for 
access to broadba nd Internet and technology devices, digital inclusion 
and literacy, and to incorporate digital competencies into the 
education system for the capacity -building of educators and students.  
 
70. The Compact may support the implementation of UNESCO’s 
Recommendatio n on Open Science which is increasingly recognized 
as a critical accelerator for the achievement of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals .  
 
71. We recognize the important role that information and 
communications technologies can play in protecting the environment  
and addressing climate change.   
 
72. The Global Digital Compact should be instrumental for integrated 
growth of digital economy and real economy, in which ICT and 
digital technology be accessible for all countries, while all 
nations  should bene fit from its advantages and benefits, as well as 
creating an open, fair, just and non -discriminatory environment for 
digital development, thereby boosting stronger global digital 
economic cooperation and giving full play to the role of the digital 
economy as an engine to global economic recovery and development.  
 
73. The GDC should r ecognize the role of digital transformation and 
innovation, including in government services, in promoting 
sustainable economies and contributing the achievement of 
sustainable development.   