Latin American and Caribbean Internet Governance Forum:
contribution to the Global Digital Compact
April 2023
About the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Governance Forum (LACIGF) 
The first regional IGF in Latin America (LACIGF) was established in 2008 and has been reconvening
annually ever since. To the date, it has had 15 editions – of which the past three were held online due to the
restrictions  imposed  by  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  A  Program  Committee,  established  to  guarantee
multistakeholder representation in the development of the agenda, decision making regarding the Forum and
to ensure its continuity and sustainability, coordinates the LACIGF. More information can be found at:
https://lacigf.org/en/.
Considering the discussions around a Global Digital Compact (GDC) within the United Nations and the
opportunity to advance on its topics also within the global Internet Governance Forum (IGF),   the 15th
edition of the LACIGF in 2022 advanced Latin American and Caribbean messages on key themes established
by the GDC in the first stake of after its initiation. A public consultation was held to define the four top
priority issues for the LAC IGF community and the was set agenda according the prioritized themes: connect
all people to the internet, including all schools; apply human rights online; protect data; and  accountability
criteria for discrimination and misleading content.
About this submission
This document was systematized by the Association for Progressive Communications (APC) and Derechos
Digitales as civil society members  of the LAC IGF Program Committee. It is based on LACIGF15 session
reports and captures key messages from the Latin American and Caribbean internet governance community
gathered at LACIGF15 from October 25 to 26th,, 2022.1 More than 400 people from 20 different countries
from the region, distributed among the different sectors that are part of the digital ecosystem and with
equitable representation by gender, participated in this event.
Although they do not reflect a regional consultation or voting process, they identify potential consensuses
within stakeholders participating in each session. Its goal is to offer input not only to the GDC public
consultation process, but to inform future regional conversations on internet and digital governance. 
We highlight that consolidated multistakeholder internet governance processes like the ones behind this
submission,  should  continue  to  be  prioritized  and  reinforced  as  we  advance  towards  a  Global  Digital
Compact. 
1October 24th was a Day 0 of the event dedicated to sessions led and organized by Youth LACIGF and the National
and  Regional  IGFs  operating  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean.  The  full  program  can  be  found  at:
https://lacigf.org/en/lacigf-15/
Submission by theme
I. Connect all people to the internet, including all schools
Informed by session 1 of the LACIGF15 “ Towards meaningful connectivity for all: challenges, lessons and
proposals from Latin America and the Caribbean”
Introduction:  While the COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated the relevance of the internet for exercising
fundamental rights, especially in extraordinary and emergency situations, it also exposed the persistent
inequalities behind internet access figures in Latin America and the Caribbean. From an identification of
challenges and lessons learned at the regional level, this section seeks to propose pathways to advance
connectivity for all.
Summarized key messages from LACIGF15 participants:
States should development connectivity policies in line with their human rights obligations;
Connectivity  should  be  understood  within  a  meaningful  access  framework  that  includes
commitments  to,  at  least,  strengthen  digital  literacy,  overcome  digital  divides,  implement
accessibility measures and promote multilingualism; 
Regulatory frameworks should allow different connectivity models to exist and flourish in order to
facilitate affordable connectivity to all (multi-model, multi-operator, multi-solution approach) and
contribute to digital inclusion;
States should promote an enabling environment that includes the adoption of special measures to
allow facilitated access to licenses and spectrum, particularly to local and community providers,
without unnecessary constraints;
States should create incentives for investments in connectivity including tax reduction for specific
actors and areas; 
Spectrum management should be considered a development tool and not a revenue generating
mechanism;
Universal service funds should be redesigned considering a gender and diversity perspective that
prioritizes the connection of the most marginalized groups.
II. Apply human rights online
Informed by session 2 of the LACIGF15  “Protecting human rights in digital environments in Latin America
and the Caribbean”
Introduction: The internet enables the exercise of a wide set of fundamental rights. As States increasingly
move towards the digitalization of essential services, internet access becomes key for the rights to education,
protest,  health,  work  and  many  others.  On  the  other  hand,  censorship,  surveillance,  online  violence  -
especially towards historically excluded groups- and the lack of relevant content in local languages, for
example, present obstacles for the exercise of those rights. This section seeks to advance proposals towards
the protection of human rights in digital environments and build from lessons learned in Latin America and
the Caribbean. 
Summarized key messages from LACIGF15 participants:
The digitalization of public services should take into account possible human rights impacts from the
design phase;
A human  rights  framework  should  inform  the  acquisition  and  implementation  of  surveillance
technologies, including biometric and facial recognition technologies;
Special attention should be given to the protection and promotion of encryption;
Audits and human rights impact assessments should be implemented within the life cycle of artificial
intelligence technologies to prevent algorithmic biases; 
Coordinated efforts between the different stakeholders should be made to strengthen the respect and
enforcement  of  human  rights  standards  and  commitments,  particularly  in  Latin  American  and
Caribbean countries;
One-size-fits-all  regulatory  solutions  should  be  avoided  and  effective  and  sustained  regional
participation  should  be  promoted  within  global  decision-making  processes  pertaining  digital
technologies and internet policies. 
III. Protect data
Informed by session 3 of the LACIGF15 “ Myths and realities around data protection in Latin America and
the Caribbean”
Introduction: Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have made significant progress in the area of
data protection in recent years. In the world's most unequal region, data protection frameworks are a key tool
for promoting individual autonomy, informational self-determination while also representing an opportunity
for economic development in the globalized digital economy. However, the consolidation of regulatory
frameworks is accompanied by implementation challenges not only institutionally, but also technically, along
with the need to seek the appropriate balance with other fundamental rights. This section seeks to develop
proposals on data protection considering the challenges, good practices and lessons learned within Latin
America and the Caribbean.
Summarized key messages from LACIGF15 participants:
The increase of multistakeholder and regional participation in global data protection and internet
governance discussions should be a priority in order to advance guidelines towards context-sensitive
and multicultural approaches;
It is necessary to make progress in the implementation of existing standards and legislation regarding
data protection regulation, and develop concrete guidelines and mechanisms to balance fundamental
rights, including the protection of personal data; 
Mechanisms, standards and guidelines should be developed to support the necessary autonomy and
specialized capacities of data protection authorities at national levels;
It  is  necessary  to  recognize  the  role  of  data  protection  authorities  to  advance  cooperation
mechanisms, collaborate with different stakeholders, and develop capacities within data protection
ecosystems.  
IV . Accountability criteria for discrimination and misleading content
Informed by session 4 of the LACIGF15 “ Who oversees the Internet? Responsibility for misleading content:
reflections from Latin America and the Caribbean”
Introduction:  Countries  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  are  increasingly  affected  by  online
disinformation: electoral or democratic decision processes have been affected by misleading content that take
over public debate, often distancing it from key discussions of public interest. The LAC region is not exempt
from orchestrated  disinformation  actions by public and corporate  actors,  or  by  organized hate  groups,
oriented to discredit or silent certain voices or speech, and currently represent one of the main challenges in
the  internet  governance  ecosystem.  This  section  presents  proposals  built  from  the  regional  experience
regarding the fight against misleading online content and behavior from a multistakeholder approach.
Summarized key messages from LACIGF15 participants:
Both, State and private sectors, should adhere to strict accountability and human rights standards and
collaboration among all stakeholders have to be considered when it comes to responding to the
threats and impacts of disinformation;
There is a need to recognize and address the gendered impact of disinformation;
It  is  necessary  to  advance  prevention  mechanisms,  in  particular  digital  literacy,  with  concrete
commitments and actions at different levels and considering approaches that are sensitive to the
various forms of inequalities that affect people when it comes to their online experience.