 
ITU’ S INPUTS TO THE GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
 
In 2003 and 2005, through the two phases of the World Summit on the Information Society 
(A/RES/56/183 ), nearly 50 heads of states and hundreds of ministers and high -level representatives 
from 175 countries, together with thousands of multistakeholder participants, endorsed the 
Declaration of WSIS Principles  and WSIS Action Lines  to establish the foundations for an information 
society for all, reflecting all the different interests at stake.  
 
Since the WSIS Summit, new technologies and services have been constantly and dramatically 
emerging, adding to the range and diversity of appl ications and potential of digital technologies on all 
aspects of economy, society and development. On the one hand, global experience since the WSIS 
Summit has shown how difficult it is to anticipate the pace at which specific technologies will be 
adopted,  and therefore to develop appropriate policies and principles to maximize potential benefits 
and mitigate potential risks. On the other hand, experience especially during the COVID -19 pandemic 
has proved how digital technologies could influence, improve, a nd impinge on inter -society solidarity 
and our joint success.  
 
The ‘Global Digital Compact’ has been proposed to build global frameworks, agreements or key 
principles on major digital issues. The key principles for digital technologies can vary depending on the 
context a specific goal(s) of the nations, groups, or organizations, but generally they should promote 
an inclusive, responsible, and sustainable use of digital technologies for all . 
 
1. CONNECT ALL PEOPLE TO THE INTERNET , INCLUDING ALL SCHOOLS  
 
Connectivity is essential for enabling the full potential of digital technologies and for ensuring that the 
benefits of digital transformation are realized by all.  At the Plenipotentiary  Conference of ITU held in 
Bucharest in 2022 , Member States strongly reiterated the critical role of connectivity for sustainable 
development, and approved new goals and targets for the Union, along with updated priorities for 
advancing towards “universal connectiv ity” and “sustainable digital transformation” outlining the ITU 
strategic Plan.  
Also i n the Bucharest Declaration on “Building A Better Digital Future for All”  (25 September 2022), 
ICT Ministers urgently called for immediate actions to accelerate connectivity an d better digital future . 
Clearly, achieving universal and meaningful connectivity is a global challenge that requires global 
commitments to address it. One of the major international commitments to fully exploit the 
opportunities provided by digital transf ormation of various sectors of the economy and supporting all 
relevant stakeholders is the Kigali Declaration  adopted by ITU Member States at the World 
Development Conference (WTDC -22) under the theme ‘Connecting the unconnected to achieve 
sustainable development’.  
1.2. CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
In particular, the global principles aiming to achieve universal and meaningful connectivity1 should 
include:   
 
• Availability: Connectivity should be available everywhere, including remote  and rural areas, to 
ensure that everyone has access to the opportunities and benefits of the digital technologies.  
 
1  Achieving universal and meaningful digital connectivity: setting a baseline and targets for 2 030, UN Office of 
Secretary -General’s Envoy on Technology and ITU, April 2022.  
 
• Inclusiveness: Connectivity should enable participation of all individuals and communities  in the 
digital world,  including women and girls, persons with disabilities, people with special needs, older 
persons, indigenous communities, and marginalized groups.  
• Meaningfulness:  Connectivity should provide users with a secure, enjoyable, valuable and 
efficient online expe rience that is affordable and accessible to all. It is essential to balance 
universal connectivity and meaningful connectivity, as neither one alone can result in significant 
societal benefits.  
• Affordability:  Connectivity should be affordable and accessibl e to all, regardless of location, socio -
economic status, or other factors.  
• Quality:  Connectivity should be reliable, with sufficient speed, quality, and stability to support the 
use of digital technologies for various purposes, including education, health,  commerce, and social 
interaction.   
• Interoperability:  Connectivity should be interoperable, allowing different systems, technologies  
and devices to work together seamlessly, and enabling the free flow of information across borders 
and platforms.  
• Security and Resilience : Connectivity should be secure and resilient, protecting against cyber -
threats (protecting the most vulnerable, inclu ding children), data breaches, unauthorized access 
and other forms of malicious uses, as well as physical risks, including natural disasters.  
• Sustainability : The development and deployment of connectivity infrastructure should be 
sustainable, environmental ly responsible, and support the urgent need to address the climate 
crisis.  
 
1.2. COMMITMENTS THAT SHOULD BE TAKEN BY STAKEHOLDERS  
 
Key ingredients or commitments necessary for achieving universal meaningful connectivity in 
accordance with the principles above include:  
 
• Assessing  policy, regulation and governance: Connectivity should be supported by future -
oriented policies and collaborative regulatory frameworks to leverage the power of connectivity 
to build innovation -driven digital ecosystem , facilitate new and emerging technologies for 
sustainable development , while effectively managing and mitigating potential harms . 
• Enhancing investment: Investment in connectivity should focus on all stages of development and 
deployment and take into conside ration interlinkages between the connectivity and broader 
digital transformation. It should also be supported by a multi -faceted approach with policy 
interventions to encourage financial investments for the physical infrastructure, such as 
broadband networ ks, to improve connectivity in underserved areas.  
• Being equipped with skills:  Citizens should be provided with the necessary digital skills to make 
use of connectivity for their social and economic well -being. Thus, investment in connectivity 
should also cover investment in education and training to achieve a digitally skilled popula tion.  
• Building inclusive digital societies : The preservation and promotion of diverse cultural identities 
and linguistic diversity through local digital content development is an important foundation of 
inclusive digital societies.  It will enhance social and economic development and stimulate 
participation of all stakeholders, including vulnerable groups and people living in rural and remote 
areas.  
• Strengthening data ecosystems: Data and measurement are critical for all nations  to achieve 
towards universal and meaningful connectivity. They are needed to conduct a proper diagnosis 
and design effective, tailored, and targeted interventions and monitor progress.  Yet, good, 
reliable, actionable data and statistics remain desperately  scant.  
• Accelerating i nnovation: Countries can overcome digital development challenges by leveraging 
cutting -edge approaches to digital innovation, such as developing locally appropriate technical 
 
capabilities through experimentation and flagship initiati ves, while incentivizing and promoting 
responsible tech -led innovation for digital entrepreneurship across economic sectors.  
• Strengthening partnership : To achieve u niversal, meaningful and accessible connectivity , it is 
essential to foster partnerships an d collaborations between g overnments, private sector, 
academia, civil society, and international organizations , creating synergies, pooling resources and 
coordinating efforts across the ecosystem. The development and implementation of connectivity 
solution s require leveraging the expertise and resources of multiple stakeholders.  
 
2. AVOID INTERNET FRAGMENTATION   
 
2.1. CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
The multistakeholder community came together in 2003 and 2005 to formulate the WSIS principles  
and advance multistakeholder cooperation.  Nearly two decades later, with the Internet now a critical 
part of our lives  (for many of us) , and our economies, we face new challenges , including relating to  
security and privacy , risks to marginalized  populations , lack of c onformance to international technical 
standards,  rise of geopolitical tensions,  and several others.  
 
If not addressed in a timely manner, these challenges could lead to the fragmentation of the Internet  
as we now know it. The key to overcoming these chall enges lies in coming together and working 
collectively as a multistakeholder community, in a spirit of openness and cooperation. Some core 
principles towards this goal could be derived from the ITU Plenipotentiary Resolution 102  on ITU's role 
with regard t o international public policy issues pertaining to the Internet and the management of 
Internet resources, including domain names and addresses : 
 
• that the Internet promises social, economic, cultural and environmental development that can 
bring out the best in humanity;  
• that increased availability of online services will contribute to bringing sustainable social and 
economic development to all the w orld's inhabitants;  
• that emerging telecommunications/ICTs will transform both the Internet and the digital economy 
and will have an impact on overall achievement of Sustainable Development Goals , and therefore 
extension of the benefits of new telecommunic ation technologies to all  the world's inhabitants  
must be promoted ; 
• that there is a need for preserving and promoting multilingualism on the Internet for an 
integrating and inclusive information society ; 
• that the management of the Internet encompasses both  technical and public policy issues and 
should involve all stakeholders and relevant intergovernmental and international organizations ; 
• that the management of the Internet is a subject of valid international interest and must flow from 
full international a nd multistakeholder cooperation on the basis of the outcomes of the two 
phases of WSIS;  and 
• that, as stated in the WSIS outcomes, all governments should have an equal role and responsibility 
for international Internet governance and for ensuring the stabil ity, security and continuity of the 
existing Internet and its future development and of the future Internet, and that there is a need 
for development of public policy by governments in consultation with all stakeholders . 
 
2.2. COMMITMENTS THAT SHOULD BE TAKEN BY STAKEHOLDERS  
 
ITU firmly believes that multi -stakeholder cooperation and collaboration is the cornerstone of a truly 
inclusive and empowering global digital space. ITU Plenipotentiary Conference Resolution 64  on Non-
 
discriminatory access to telecommunication/information and communication technology facilities, 
services and applications, including applied research and transfer of technology, and e -meetings, on 
mutually agreed terms  also invites Member States “ to refrain from taking any unilateral and/or 
discriminatory actions that could impede technically another Member State from having full access 
to the Internet, within the spirit of Article 1 of the ITU Constitution and the WSIS principles ”. 
 
ITU, as the speci alized UN agency for ICTs, offers numerous opportunities for various stakeholders to 
convene and gain a comprehensive understanding of the challenges in the ICT sector and the solutions 
needed. These opportunities include the WSIS Forum , as well as ITU’s Council Working Group on 
International Internet -related Public Policy Issues  (CWG -Internet) , among others.    
 
3. APPLY HUMAN RIGHTS ONLINE  
 
3.1. CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
Advancing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development requires global solutions that can leverage 
the power of digital to drive progress. Increasingly, as society, economy and technology become 
inextricably linked, these efforts and initiatives need to be designed holistically and grounded in 
human rights. The right of the public to access international telecommunication services is 
recognized in ITU’s Constitution , with certain conditions defined under which services can be stopped. 
The International Telecommunication Regulations  (ITRs) also contain provisions regarding the right to 
means of  communication . 
 
3.2. COMMITMENTS THAT SHOULD BE TAKEN BY STAKEHOLDERS  
 
The core tenet of ITU’s  work on connectivity is focused on developmental values and rights, placing a 
special emphasis on the inclusion of women and girls, persons with disabilities, older persons, 
indigenous communities, other marginalized groups, and people in remote and rural  areas.  
 
In addition, the interplay between technical standards and human rights is also important to highlight. 
Technical standards underpin and help technologies work together, making them safer, more 
accessible, more affordable, and more sustainable . As an international standards -making body, ITU 
is cognizant of the importance of considering potential human rights impacts at the design and 
development stage of technical standards as well. This relationship has been recognized by the Human 
Rights Council  as well, and it has called for closer cooperation between the Office of the High 
Commission on Human Rights and Standards Development Organizations including the ITU ( Res. 
47/23 ). 
 
In 2022, the Global Youth Summit process convened by ITU produced a Youth  Call to Action ‘My digital 
future’  also calling for ‘[ u]phold[ing] human rights online and develop frameworks for navigating the 
internet safely, expressing oneself freely, requiring consent for online transactions, acc essing social 
and economic opportunities and creating value using digital technologies, tools and the internet ’. 
 
4. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  
 
4.1. CORE PRINCIPLES  
 
 
The Sixth World Telecommunication/ICT Forum (WTPF -21) organized by ITU  in December 2021  
agreed2 that: 
   
• the responsible development and use of new and emerging technologies , particularly AI, can 
help to empower future innovation and address related policy issues, and that stakeholders 
involved in their development and use should engage in policy discussions, including on 
accountability and sustainable development;  
• that it is important to promote building confidence and security in and inclusive development 
of these technologies as well as to foster equitable access to their benefits;  
• that enabling strategies, policies, regulations, guidelines or principles may contr ibute to 
maximizing the potential of such  technologies to facilitate the use of telecommunications/ICTs 
for sustainable development;  
• that all stakeholders need to work closely together to harness the potential of such services 
and technologies for the bene fit of all and to advance sustainable development, as well as 
address any common policy issues and other challenges, inter alia , related to confidence and 
security, reliability, inclusiveness, transparency and interoperability, that may arise in their 
use; and 
• that stakeholders should be encouraged to implement projects, programmes, and initiatives 
to enable all nations to benefit from the use of such technologies to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals . 
 
4.2. COMMITMENTS THAT SHOULD BE TAKEN BY STAKEHOLDERS  
 
Give the role that AI is expected to play in our globally interconnected digital future, one of the key 
challenges before us now is how to maximize the benefits and opportunities that AI presents, while 
mitigating the associated risks and challenges. Cross -sectoral and multi -stakeholder collaboration will 
be key.  
 
In Opinion 4 of WTPF -21, all stakeholders have been  invited to work collaboratively :  
 
• to utilize the potential of relevant new and emerging tec hnologies, such as AI, to facilitate the 
use of telecommunications/ICTs to achieve the SDGs;  
• to promote public policies and strategies at the national, regional, and international levels to 
take advantage of opportunities and overcome challenges in the use and mobilization of 
technologies above for sustainable development;  and 
• to encourage the participation of all stakeholders from developing countries, and in particular 
from Least Developed Countries (LDCs), Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs) and S mall 
Island Developing States (SIDS), in the activities of relevant entities, organizations, institutions 
and initiatives that are working on the various policy matters set out in this Opinion,  
 
The Best Practice Guidelines of ITU’s Global Symposium for Regulators (GSR)   adopted by the global 
community of regulators provide guidance to national ICT and digital sector and cross -sector 
regu lators and policy makers overseeing ICT and digital markets.  In the increasingly complex and 
dynamic digital transformation, it is important to agree on common principles and put forward clear 
and simple rule s, such as:  
 
• Multiple formats and modes of regulation  are required to incentivize the development and 
adoption of new and emerging technologies . Formal regulation should leave sufficient space 
 
2 WTPF -21 Opinion 4: New and emerging technologies and services to facilitate the use of 
telecommunications/ICTs for sustainable development  
 
for self -regulation, hybrid and collaborative regulatory models and oversight mechanisms for 
law enforcement. From incentives and rewards through forbearance to targeted obligations, 
the range of tools and remedies at hand for regulators to explore is wide . New issues call for 
novel approaches and the regulatory canvas has expanded to cover regulatory sandboxes, 
ethical frameworks, technology roadmaps, regulatory impact assessment, multi -varied 
research and big data simulation in exploring the most balanced , proportionate and fair 
regulatory response. Artificial intelligence, Internet of Things, and online disinformation are 
some of the complex issues waiting to be addressed.  
• Policies and regulations need to provide the necessary guardrails to ensure an open , 
inclusive and transparent digital environment.  Regulatory decision -making processes should 
encourage broad participation of stakeholders, including those from industry, academia, civil 
society and local governments, through formal and informal channels. Throughout the 
development and implementation of emerging technologies such as Artificial Intelligence and 
Internet of Things, regulated entities and regulators should share responsibility for the 
development, monitoring and implementation of rules and gui delines.  
• Data shielding : Clear, strong and enforceable rules related to data governance can provide 
adequate shield for digital consumer protection while creating a predictable, structured 
framework for doing digital business. State -of-the-art regulatory p rotocols and mechanisms 
can go a long way towards enhancing trust in the digital ecosystem, such as the commitment 
to comply with requirements related to the access to non -personal data retained by digital 
platforms, transparency of certain essential algor ithms used by digital services, portability of 
essential data of structuring platforms, interoperability and maintenance of APIs (application 
programming interfaces).  
 
ITU Plenipotentiary Resolution 214 (Bucharest, 2022)  on Artificial Intelligence technologies and 
telecommunications/information and communication technologies  also recognized that fully realizing 
the benefits of AI technologies will require bridging digital divides and achieving universal access to 
telecommunications/ICTs , and that the development of AI brings both opportunities and challenges .  
 
 
  
 
ANNEX  1: WSIS  FORUM 2023  INPUT TO THE GLOBAL DIGITAL COMPACT  
 
 
WSIS Forum 2023 Input to the Global Digital Compact  
 
The WSIS Forum 2023  hybrid week was held from 13 to 17 March in Geneva, Switzerland, under the 
theme of WSIS Action Lines for building back better and accelerating the achievement of the SDGs . The 
Forum’s hybrid week welcomed more than 2,700 participants attending both onsit e and remotely 
from over 150 countries. The hybrid week comprised over 250 sessions with innovative formats, 
including open space talks, country workshops, knowledge cafes, round table discussions, and many 
more. The WSIS Forum 2023 Chairperson is H.E. Dr Emilija Stojmenova Duh, Minister of Digital 
Transformation, Slovenia.  
 
The high -level track had a significant presence of 46 Ministers, 50 Ambassadors, and 15 Mayors from 
various countries around the world, discussing implementation of the WSIS process and  its Action 
Lines, advancement of the Sustainable Development Goals, contributing to the Global Digital Compact 
and other global processes. The event also recognized outstanding contributions in the field of 
information and communication technology by awar ding stakeholders for their contributions to 
various topics, including innovation in healthy ageing, digital service design, generation connect and  e-
government activities. The WSIS Forum 2023 continues with virtual workshops from April to May 
2023.  Highli ghts, outcomes, and achievements of all the sessions of the WSIS Forum 2023 are 
available  online .  
 
This year’s hybrid week had several innovative session formats and featured around 250 sessions 
organized by multistakeholders (governments, private sector, civil society, academia, international 
organizations and technical community),  including open space talks, thematic workshops, country 
workshops, WSIS Action Lines Facilitation Meetings, knowledge cafes, WSIS Prizes, high -level track 
sessions, and many more. The stakeholders appreciated the new innovative formats, which fostered 
more participatory and collaborative exchanges with engaging dialogues. 30+ exhibitions spaces  
showcased ICTs for sustainable development. The United Nations Group on the Information Society 
(UNGIS)  reiterated its commitment to the WSIS process and WSIS Action Lines implementation as well 
as to strengthen the alignment of the WSIS and SDG processes. UNGIS members discussed the 
preparation of an action plan to leverage the pro file of UNGIS and to contribute to other global 
processes on digital for development issues, including the Global Digital Compact.  
 
The WSIS Forum 2023 also provided a platform for multistakeholder discussions  on the Global Digital 
Compact. The co -facilit ators of the GDC, H.E. Mr. Claver Gatete, Ambassador of Rwanda, and H.E. Ms. 
Anna Karin Eneström, Ambassador of Sweden, were present at the WSIS Forum and had the 
opportunity to interact and listen to the views of multistakeholders on the future on GDC and  the 
importance of the WSIS process beyond 2025. Mr. Amandeep Singh Gill, UN Secretary -General's Envoy 
on Technology, was also present at the Forum.  
 

 
WSIS Forum 2023 Ambassadors Roundtable Input  
 
The WSIS Forum 2023 Ambassadors roundtable discussion took place on 13 March 2023, featuring 
approximately 50 Ambassadors to UN in Geneva, where they deliberated on the following topics:  
 
- Leveraging the power of information and communication technologies (ICTs) and the need to 
bring about an inclus ive, prosperous, sustainable, safe and trusted digital future for all;  
- Meaningful communication and Geneva community’s role in effective implementation of UN 
Processes.  
- WSIS+20 review process and the future of WSIS beyond 2025 – identifying emerging trends, 
challenges and opportunities for implementing the WSIS Action Lines.  
- WSIS+20 review and the Global Digital Compact (GDC)  
▪ GDC discussions could consider ongoing multist akeholder discussions on WSIS+20. The 
WSIS Action Lines are particularly important as they capture emerging trends, 
opportunities, and challenges in the digital world beyond 2025.  WSIS Forum will continue 
to play an important role in digitalization.  
▪ Global  Digital Compact process must reflect the needs of developing countries to create 
more equitable prosperity and reduce structural inequalities. Questions on the GDC 
process, including its linkages with the Summit of the Future, were raised. Mexico 
informed  that during the GDC discussions in Mexico, the imperative of closing the digital 
divides was discussed to produce tangible elements to be included in the future Global 
Digital Compact to be adopted at the Summit of the Future in 2024.  
▪ To avoid duplicatio n, the WSIS+20, Global Digital Compact, and Summit of the Future 
should be synergized. Some highlighted strengthening the role and contribution of the 
Geneva community towards can contribute to Global Digital Compact discussions with 
Sweden, Rwanda, and th e UN Tech Envoy. WSIS+20 is important to achieve the common 
goal of connecting humanity.  
 
WSIS Forum 2023 Ministerial Roundtable: WSIS Forum 2023 Chairperson’s Concluding Summary  
 
The Ministerial Roundtable at the WSIS Forum 2023 (13 -17 March), benefited  from the presence and 
contributions of 40 Ministers/Deputies. In an innovative format with 3 breakout rooms chaired by 
Ministers (Gambia, Philippines, UAE), 3 topics were discussed:  
 
- ICTs rescuing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development WSIS Action Li nes for building 
back better and accelerating the achievement of the SDGs  
- World Summit Information Society Ministerial Contribution to the Global Digital Compact 
Consultations  
- Exploring the Potential of Space for all as a Driver of Sustainable Development  
 
The Ministerial roundtable of WSIS Forum 2023 concluded with the following:  
 
1. They emphasized that harnessing the power of digital will be vital to rescuing the SDGs. ICTs are a 
powerful tool that should be fully leveraged towards this goal. The WSIS process provides an existing 
and well -functioning framework for accelerating the achievement of the SDGs.  
 
2. They invited all stakeholders to harness the power of digital and leverage the alignment between 
the WSIS process and the 2030 agenda for sus tainable development, as well as the SDG Digital Day to 
accelerate the achievement the SDGs.  
 
 
3. They recognized that discussions on Our Common Agenda and especially its Global Digital Compact 
are complementary to the WSIS Framework. Therefore, they invite d all stakeholders to leverage the 
learnings of the implementation of the WSIS Framework and related process in their deliberations of 
Our Common Agenda.  
 
4. They recognized the enormous potential that Space holds in global efforts to connect the 
unconnect ed and beyond. Thus, they invited all stakeholders to work together to ensure that Space is 
leveraged in a safe and sustainable manner.  
  
 
ANNEX  2: BUCHAREST DECLARATION ON “BUILDING A BETTER DIGITAL FUTURE FOR ALL”, 
ADOPTED AT THE MINISTERIAL ROUNDTABLE , BUCHAREST , 25 SEPTEMBER 2022  
  

 
 
  

 
ANNEX 3: ITU’ S WTDC  DECLARATION , KIGALI , 6-16 JUNE 2022  
 
 
  

 
 
  

 
 
  

 
ANNEX  4: ITU’ S COMMITMENTS ON CONNECTIVITY AND DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION  
 
ITU’s vision  is an information and digital society, empowered by the interconnected world, where 
telecommunication/ICTs enable and accelerate social, economic and environmentally sustainable 
growth and development for everyone. As the specialized UN agency for ICTs, ITU’s mission  is to 
promote, facilitate and foster affordable and universal access to telecommunication/ICT networks, 
services and applications and their use for social, economic and environmentally sustainable growth 
and development.  
 
To work towards this  vision and mission, ITU has a common strategy and accountability framework, 
called ‘Connect 2030’ . The Connect 2030 Agenda for Global Telecommunication/ICT Development  
focuses on how technological advances can contribute to accelerate the achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. With the five goals: i) Growth, ii) Inclusiveness, iii) 
Sustainability, iv) Innovation and v) Partnership, the Connect 2030 Agenda is linked to ITU’s overall 
Strategic Plan, ensuring that technology serves humanity and the planet.   
 
The Kigali Action Plan adopted at the WTDC -22 constitutes one of the main engines of a forward -
looking agenda to address the global connectivity gap along with a set of key WTDC resolutions3, 
including the five priorities for ITU Development Sector (ITU -D): i) Affordable connect ivity, ii) Digital 
transformation, iii) Enabling policy and regulatory environment, iv) Resource mobilization and 
international cooperation, and v) Enabling environment. A set of initiatives, including the ones for six 
regions of ITU , adopted by WTDC guide  ITU implementation efforts and countries themselves in 
developing and implementing specific projects to address priority needs in the area of ICTs and digital 
development.  
 
• CONNECTIVITY INITIATIVES : The Partner2Connect Digital Coalition (P2C)  is a global alliance 
launched by ITU in 2021 in cooperation with t he Office of the Secretary -General’s Envoy on 
Technology and the UN -OHRLLS. The Coalition provides an open platform for resources, 
commitments and partnerships to be mobilized with the objective of fostering meaningful 
connectivity and digital transformati on globally, in the hardest -to-connect communities, including 
those LDCs, LLDCs, and SIDS. To date, the coalition has mobilized some 600 pledges coming from 
over 280 entities around the world, totalling nearly USD  30 billion in value for extending 
meaningf ul connectivity, with financial or in -kind commitments addressing key issues like 
infrastructure, cybersecurity, digital skills, inclusion, and socio -economic transformation.  
 
Giga  is an ITU -UNICEF initiative dedicated to connecting every school in the world to the Internet, 
and every young person to information, opportunity, and choice. Giga's work includes: 1) mapping 
the location of schools and monitoring their connectivity status in real time; 2) planning the 
infrastructure, policies, regulations, and investments needed to deliver sustainable school 
connectivity; 3) designing solutions to finance the capital and operational costs of connecting 
schools; and 4) supporting governments to  contract connectivity for schools. As of December 
2022, Giga has helped connect more than 5,700 schools and 2.2 million children across 19 
countries. Giga has also mapped 2.1 million schools across 137 countries.  
 
• CONNECTIVITY INFRASTRUCTURE MAPPING : In t he area of infrastructure and network 
development, identifying connectivity gaps in ICT and digital infrastructures is key. The ITU 
 
3  Notably, WTDC Resolution 37 (Rev. Kigali, 2022)  on Bridging the digital divide, WTDC Resolution 77 (Rev. 
Buenos Aires, 2017) on Broadband technology and applic ations for greater growth and development of  
telecommunication/information and communication services and broadband connectivity , and WTDC 
Resolution 89 (Kigali, 2022) on Digital transformation for sustainable development  
 
Broadband Mapping (of its 193 Member States)  activities make use of geospatial tools applied to 
telecom infrastructure, together with relevant data for identifying missing links. This allows the 
development of projects and case studies for planning national broadband infrastructure 
deployment in suppor t to digital transformation across sectors (e.g., financial inclusion, education, 
health). ITU mapping tools feed into partnership activities such as in school connectivity, financial 
inclusion and the use of ICT Business Planning for sustainable network d evelopment.  
 
• CONNECTIVITY DATA AND STATISTICS : Data is critical to our goal of connecting the world. It tells 
us where we were, where we are, what works and what does not. It is a key ingredient of empirical 
research for establishing correlation, determining causality, identifying good practices, and 
designing effective interventions. ITU leads the global ICTs statistics agenda. It collects , actively 
uses the data and statistics to monitor digital divide, and disseminates vital informa tion and 
carries out world -class research to support evidence -based decision making towards universal and 
meaningful connectivity and sustained digital transformation: e.g., through ITU DataHub , ITU’s 
annual Facts and figures  and ICT price t rends , and t he Digital Development Dashboard .  
 
• SPECTRUM AND SATELLITE FOR CONNECTIVITY : At the forthcoming Radiocommunication 
Conference (WRC -23), ITU Member States will decide after a 4 -year study cycle to update the 
Radio Regulations on agenda items,  including but not limited to: i) the continued development of 
International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) systems, including the use of high -altitude 
platform stations as IMT base stations (HIBS), ii) the enhancement of aeronautical and maritime 
communi cations, including by satellite, for sub -orbital vehicles and for unmanned aircraft systems, 
iii) the modernization of the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS), iv) the 
improvement of the science services for the increasing importance and nee d for weather forecast 
and climate change monitoring and other scientific missions, iv) the development of the technical, 
operational and regulatory measures for the use of earth stations in motion on board aircrafts and 
ships for communication with geosta tionary and non -geostationary satellites, and v) the 
continued development of the regulation of recent constellations deployment, as well as 
improving the regulation of space planned bands and equitable access to satellite spectrum by 
new Member States.  
 
• ENABLING ENVIRONMENT (POLICY AND REGULATION ): As recognized by the regulatory 
community as best practice, an adaptive, resilient, evidence and outcome based, collaborative 
and fit -for-purpose policy and regulatory ecosystem is necessary for open and competi tive digital 
markets to thrive along with delivering positive consumer outcomes and provide the foundation 
for Digital Transformation. The Best Practice Guidelines ‘ Regulatory uplift for financing digital 
infrastructure, access and use ’ adopted by regulators at the Global Symposium for Regulators 
(GSR)  further amplify the importance of policy and regulatory thought leadership, cross -sectoral 
collaboration, building trust, engagement, and novel regulatory approaches the gold standard for 
digital regulation , to fast-forwarding digital connectivity for all , and bridge the funding and 
financing gap in digital markets.  
 
Serving as a reference framework of good practices for digital policy and regulation, the G5 
Benchmark  and ICT Regulatory Tracker   help countries to track progress, identify gaps in policy 
and regulatory frameworks and to establish roadmaps towards digital collaborative governance 
and inclusive digital transformation across all sectors of the economy.   
 
• DIGITAL SKILLS: Digital skills are key to digital transformation and a significant enabler of each 
country’s digitization. Instilling the necessary skills has become a key part of national digital 
transformation strategies.  With a wide range of projects that target digital skills, ITU contributes 
 
actively to the strengthening  of digital capacities among its member states, e.g., via training for 
ICT professionals; basic and intermediate skills training for citizens and marginalized groups; a 
commitment to invest in skills development for young people; tools and guidelines to im plement 
digital skills strategies; and international cooperation to help governments increase their digital 
capacity. Among others, the ITU Digital Tr ansformation Centres (DTC) Initiative , launched with 
Cisco in 2019, aims to strengthen people’s digital capacities, particularly in underserved 
communities. Over 150  000 people (of which over 60% were female) have been t rained in basic 
and intermediate digital skills through 13 DTCs located in Africa, the Americas, and the Arab and 
Asia-Pacific regions.  
 
• CYBERSECURITY AND EMERGENCY TELECOMMUNICATION S: ITU is committed to promoting 
cybersecurity and ensuring the security of telecommunication/ICT networks and services. Its 
Global Cybersecurity Index (GCI)  provides a framework for measuring a country's commitment 
and helps improve cybersecurity. ITU's National CIRT Programme  helps enhance countries' 
cybersecurity capabilities, and its Cyberdrill  exercises provide hands -on training for cyber incide nt 
response teams. ITU is also helping countries develop their National Cybersecurity Strategies and 
action plans  and promoting cybersecurity inclusion through initiatives such as Child Online 
Protection (COP ) and Women in Cyber . ITU provides capacity building support for developing 
countries and has established programs for women in cybersecurity. As an internat ional 
standards -making body for ICTs, interoperability, accessibility and security are our requirements 
from the design stage. Over 200 standards focusing on security and a series of ICT standards (e.g., 
Artificial Intelligence, Quantum Information Technol ogy for Networks, many more.) have been 
published by ITU.  
As the world witnessed an increased number of natural hazards and climate -related disasters, ITU 
works with countries to better leverage ICTs in disaster risk reduction and management, such as 
developing National Emergency Telecommunications plans , and promotes the adoption of the 
Tampere Convention to promote coordination across different stakeholders in the whole lifecycle 
of disasters. Mo reover, as part of the UN Early Warnings for All Initiative , ITU is leading the effort 
on warning dissemination an d communication pillar, and highlight the use of mobile networks 
(e.g., cell -broadcast and/or location -based SMS in combination with Common Alerting Protocol to) 
in early warnings. In disaster response, ITU Disaster Connectivity Maps  support government and 
first responders in identifying connectivity outages to facilitate faster and targeted connectivity 
restorati on. Upon request from the country, ITU deploys equipment  to support coordination of 
relief operations, with the support of the IT U Emergency Telecommunication Roster. ITU works 
closely with Emergency Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) and other partners in disaster response.  
• SUSTAINABLE CONNECTIVITY , INCLUDING WORK ON GHG  EMISSIONS AND E -WASTE : While 
digital technologies are critical tools to respond to the most pressing global challenges of our time 
and a key for fast -tracking the achievement of the SDGs, responsible innovation and 
environmental and circular considerations must become integral in the design, deployment and 
decommissio ning of digital technologies. ITU’s unique membership and mandate make it an 
important player for driving green digital transformation. This includes it work on green standards  
and e-waste data  and policies , where it guides countries and provides technica l assistance to 
support countries in establishing environmentally sound national e -waste management systems 
and regulation. ITU also tracks industry emissions, energy use and climate commitments from the 
world’s largest technology companies and supports co untries in monitoring and tracking ICT 
sector G reenhouse Gases (G HG) emissions and energy use (e.g., ITU’s Global E -waste Monitor  and 
the Greening Digital Companies Report ). 
  
 
• CONVENING GLOBAL PLATFORMS FOR CONNECTIVITY : Led by H.E. President Paul Kagame of 
Rwanda and Carlos Slim Helù of Mexico, the Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development  
is co -chaired by ITU’s Secretary -General  and UNESCO Director -General and comprises over 50 
Commissioners who represent a cross -cutting group of top CEO and industry and policy leaders, 
with academia and organizations concerned with development.  The Commission serves as a 
foundation for bringing the UN Secretary -General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation to life with 
its advocacy and thought leadership work and contributing and  shaping the Global Digital Compat 
process (in particular in  the pillar of  " Connect all people to the internet, including all schools") 
and outcomes as the high -level advisory multistakeholder group.  
 
• THE WORLD TELECOMMUNICATION /ICT  POLICY FORUM (WTPF)  is a high -level international 
forum to exchange views on the key policy issues arising from today’s fast changing 
telecommunication/ICT environment. At the last meeting, held in Dec2021, the Forum approved 
a set of five non -binding policy guidance documen ts, known as ‘Opinions’, such as on emerging 
telecommunication/ICT services and technologies, affordable and security connectivity, digital 
literacy and skills, and more,  helping shape future technology policy. ITU, together with UNESCO, 
UNDP and UNCTAD, in collaboration with all WSIS Action Line (co -) facilitators and partners, is also 
convening the annua l WSIS Forum  as a global multistakeholder platform facilitating the 
implementation of the WSIS Action Lines. With the theme of WSIS Action Lines for ‘Building Back 
Better and Accelerating the achievement of the SDGs’, the WSIS Forum 2023  was held from 13 – 
17 March at the ITU HQs in Geneva, followed by virtual workshops scheduled in April and May.  
 
• GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR GENDER EQUALITY IN THE DIGITAL AGE (EQUALS)  contributes 
to the UN Sustainable Development Agenda through actions and evidence -based research aimed 
at closing the global gender digital divide. By promoting awareness, building political 
commitments, leveraging resources and knowledge, harnessing the capacities of partners, and 
supporting real action, EQUALS seeks to achieve digital gender equality. Generation Connect  is a 
leading platform to engage, specifically wi th global youth and encourage their participation as 
equal partners alongside the leaders of today’s digital change, empowering young people with the 
digital skills and opportunities to advance their vision of connected future. Its Call to Action ‘ My 
digital future ’ facilitated by ITU serves as an advocacy instrument to enhance youth engagement 
in ITU and across the UN system and strengthen the youth perspective in  organizational digital 
strategies and their implementation.  
 
• THE AI FOR GOOD PLATFORM , organized by ITU, together with 40 partner UN agencies and co -
convened by the government of  Switzerland. The goal of AI for Good is to identify practical 
applications of AI to accelerate progress towards the SDGs and connect AI innovators with public 
and private -sector decision -makers to help scale up AI solutions globally. The landmark 2017 AI 
for Good Global Summit marked the beginning of a global dialogue on the potential of AI to act as 
a force for good. The action -oriented 2018 and 2019 summits gave rise to numerous AI for Good 
projects including several ITU "pre -standardization" initiatives  investigating the standardization 
requirements for high -potential AI use cases. The upcoming AI for Good Global Summit 2023  (6-7 
July, Geneva) combines 3,000+ participants and online participation from the over 15,000+ 
members of the AI -powered community platform, the AI for Good Neural Network , making it the 
world’s most inclusive AI solutions and matchmaking event.  
 
As part of AI for Good, ITU, in collaboration with over 40 UN agencies and  bodies, issues an annual 
report that aims to present a comprehensive overview of the activities being carried out by the 
UN system. The 2022 edition is available here . 
 
 
• AI IN STANDARDIZATION : There are a number of pre -standardization initiatives, open to 
everyone, called ITU-T Focus Groups  that work for the quick development of specifications to 
address industry needs as they emerge on various aspects of AI: inclu ding digital agriculture, 
disaster management, health, autonomous networks, and the metaverse. ITU -T Study Groups, 
that are open to all ITU members, also address aspects of AI and machine learning within their 
mandates. The work has so far resulted in ITU-T Recommendations and Supplements  as well as 
deliverable s from the various ITU-T Focus Groups . There is also ongoing work within ITU -R on this 
topic.  
 
• GLOBAL INITIATIVE ON AI AND DATA COMMONS : The Global Initiative on AI and Data 
Commons is a program and collaborative platform to support the implementation of beneficial AI 
based solutions to accelera te progress towards the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. It is now 
initiating a public collaborative effort named “ Project Resilience ”. The vision, in the continuity of 
efforts towards AI for the common good, is to create a public AI service where a global community 
of innovators and thought leaders can enhance and utilize a collection of data and AI approaches 
both in the context of th e current pandemic and for similar future challenges. The goal is to 
collaboratively design and build an open AI system that could inform and help tackle global 
decision -augmentation problems.  
 
• AI/ML  COMPETITIONS (“CHALLENGES ”): Through the Challenge, ITU  encourages and supports 
the growing community driving the integration of AI/ML in networks and at the same time 
enhances the community driving standardization work for AI/ML, creating new opportunities for 
industry and academia to influence the evolution of ITU standards. The solutions can be accessed 
in several repositories on the Challenge GitHub . 
 
• UN HIGH-LEVEL COMMITTEE ON PROGRAMMES (HLCP)  INTERAGENCY WORKING GROUP 
ON AI (IAWG -AI): The IAWG -AI, established during the 40th HLCP session in October 2020, 
focuses on advancing policy and programmatic coherence of AI activities within the UN. It 
currently has 40 UN agencies and bodies as members, and several workstreams such as capacity 
development, procurement guidelines, educa tion, justice, industry, foresight, and other areas .  
 