 
  
 
 
 
“The Rights of Every Child Must be Respected, Protected 
and Fulfilled in the Digital Environment”  
 
- Save the C hildren ’s submission  for Global Digital C ompact Consultation  
28th April  2023  
Numbers in a nutshell  
● Children make u p an estimated one -third of internet users worldwide1 
● More than 175,000  children go online for the first time every day2 
● Two thirds of school aged children  don’t have access to the internet at home.3 
● There was a 15,000% increase  in child online sexual abuse materials analysed by the 
National Centre for Missing and Exploited Children from 2005 - 20204  
● 59% of  adolescents  in a US study have been bullied or harassed online and a similar 
share says it’s a major problem for people their age5 
● 20% o f children  surveyed across 12 countries in the past year reported suffering from 
online sexual exploitation and abuse6  
● 58% of girls and young women  in a recent large -scale survey reported that they have 
personally experienced some form of online harassme nt on social media platforms7 
 
Overview  
The world as we know it is rapidly evolving with the digital world radically transforming 
societies and economies. While digital technology provides a way for children to learn, play, 
explore their interests, and create friendships, it also presents real risks for bullying, abuse, 
trafficking, exploitation and online radicalisation. One in three internet users is under the age 
of 18.8 Meaningful access to digital technologies ca n support children to realise their full 
 
1 https://www.unicef -irc.org/growing -up-
connected#:~:text=At%20the%20global%20level%2C%20it,under%2018%20years%20of%20age   
2 UNICEF “More than 175,000 children go online for the first time every day, tapping into great opportunities but 
facing grave risks (2018) https://www.unicef.org/eca/press -releases/more -175000 -children -go-online -first-time -
every -day-tapping -great -opportunities   
3 https://www.unicef.org/press -releases/two -thirds -worlds -school -age-children -have -no-internet -access -home -
new-unicef -itu  
4 https://www.thorn.org/blog/announcing -safer -built -by-thorn -eliminate -csam   
5 https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2018/09/27/a -majority -of-teens -have -experienced -some -form -of-
cyberbullying/   
6 The research was conducted from 201 9 to 2022 in six countries in East Asia Pacific (Cambodia, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) and seven countries in Eastern and Southern Africa (Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda). http://globalkidsonline.net/disrupting -harm -findings/   
7 Plan International Free to be online? Girl’s and Young Women’s experiences of online harassment (2022) https://plan -
international.org/uploads/2022/02/sotwgr2020 -commsreport -en-2.pdf  page 16  
8 Kardefelt Winther, Daniel; Livingstone, Sonia; Saeed, Marium (2019) Growing up in a connected world, Innocenti 
Research Report , UNICEF Office of Research - Innocenti, Florence  

 
 range of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights.9 Yet while access is increasing, it is 
not equitably distributed , nor is it guaranteed to be a safe experience  
for children where laws and policies e nsure safety online, companies ensure child centred 
design, and parents and caregivers are supported to help their children navigate digital 
technology safety.  
Many children have high hopes for what they want in a digital world and what they see as the 
potential in technology.10 For some children , technology provides a way to connect with 
others and access a community they may otherwise have been excluded from, for others it 
may pose a real danger to their physical and mental health and wellbeing. In 2020, during the 
COVID -19 pandemic, the number of photos, videos and content related to online sexual 
abuse rose by 50% with nearly 70 million images and videos reported to the National Centre 
for Missing and Exploited Children in the United States.11 
The UNCRC General comment No. 25 , adopted in March 2021, formally established children 
as rights holders in the digital environment. In doing so it brought the internet – a largely 
privately -owned and managed sphere – into the scope of the Convention and articulated the 
interactions with other relevant international law – as concerns issues such as business 
responsibility, privacy, the prevention of violence against women and girls and child sexual 
abuse.  
The internet is borderless, so those seeking to harm children online can now do so from a 
different country or continent. While children ha ve grown up in  the digital world, their 
caregivers and the laws, policies and services that are meant to protect and support them 
have not  been so quick to adapt . In recognition of the need to rapidly scale up and coordinate 
our efforts, Save the Children has placed growing our engagement and influence in support 
of children’s rights in the digital environment as a key priority.  
We applaud the decision to establish a Global Digital Compact through an inter -
governmental process. We strongly believe that the Compact presents a unique opportunity 
for member states and other stakeholders to pledge their commitment towards fulfilling 
children's rights in the digital environment . 
 
This document outlines Save the Children's submission for the Global Digital Compact. Our 
focus is on the core principles and recommended commitments within each thematic track of 
the Compact.  
 
Principles:  
We propose that overarching core principles be app lied to all thematic areas as children's 
rights are indivisible. It is imperative to view children's rights as a whole and to adopt a 
child -centered approach to ensure that the rights of every child are respected, protected, 
and fulfilled in the digital en vironment.  
 
9 General comment No.25 (2021) on Children’s Rights in Relation to the Digital E nvironment. CRC/C/GC/25  
10 5RightsFoundation ( 2021 )  Our Rights in a Digital World  Western Sydney Uni versity  
11 Dance, Gabriel; Keller, Michael H.  (Feb 2020)  “Tech Companies Detect a Surge in Online Videos of Child Sexual 
Abuse ” New York Times  
 
  
We call  all governments, companies, civil society organisations and other stakeholders 
should adhere to.  
● Children and their rights at the heart of design: Ensure a child centred,  child rights,  
intersectional, holistic approach, taking account o f children in all their diversity,  is 
recognised and systematically addressed in policies, programmes and decision -making 
around the digital environment.  
● Children’s partic ipation is key: We want to build a digital world with and for children  that 
is safe and positive w here children’s needs and rights ar e at the very heart of digital 
design. Children must be engaged in on -going processes to realise their rights in a digital 
environment.  
● Strong frameworks in line with international laws and standard s: Ensure  robust and 
consistent laws, policies and regulations  and strong coordination around the digital 
environment are created and secured.  
○ Ensure efforts are fully connected to existing child protection, education, health, 
and justice systems and servi ces conne cted to recognising children’s rights to 
respect, promote and protect these rights in the digital environment.  
● Corporate responsibility: The businesses in the online space need to address their 
responsibility connected to their broader corporate responsib ility for due diligence  to 
identify and prevent rights violations through creation and support of mechanisms to 
detect and respond to violations, as well as reporting on progress on how they actively 
prevent violations and set remediatio n processes.  
 
Recommendations  under specific thematic areas:  
 
Connect all people to the internet, including all schools  
 
Save the C hildren ’s recommendation : Bridge the divide: Ensuring access to the internet for 
children, in all their diversity.  
 
Millions of children globally are spending increasing amounts of time online, but at the same 
time, millions of children have no access to the internet at all. Depending on their 
background, including level of wealth, education, gender and disability, chil dren may also face 
barriers to accessing the internet safely.  On issues of discrimination and inequality there is 
often no barrier between experiences online and offline. “For adolescent girls in particular, 
entrenched gender stereotypes and harmful socia l norms begin shaping and differentiating 
their access to, experience of, and competencies in digital technologies and environments in 
early years, in the home, in the community and at school.”12  
Bridging these digital divides is key to fulfilling the rig ht to non -discrimination, which requires 
that all children have equal and effective access to the digital world.     
 
12 Plan International, Policy Brief for Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) 2023.  
 
 This gap has been acutely felt in the last two years as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic and 
the resulting school closures. Over 2020 and 2021, nearly 147 million children missed more 
than half of their in -person schooling, amounting to  2 trillion hours of lost learning .13  
These unequal power relations and structural inequalities are then deeply ingrained in the 
design, availability and use of technology.  
Governments, the private sector and civil society should coordinate on actions to bridge the 
digital divide among children on access, literacy, privacy and online safety , taking steps to : 
● Ensure access for children in all their diversity, and recognise that children are 
not a homogeneous group and some will require specialised considerations.  
● Use a gender and power analysis to understand and address the gendered risks 
and barriers that children may face rega rding safe access to digital spaces.  
● Create an enabling environment for children with disabilities by addressing the  
disability digital divide in schools and vast disparities in the availability of learning 
material, including access to the Internet and co mmunication devices.  
Inaccessibility  leads to limited access or lack of access to quality education for 
many children, particularly those from neuro -diverse backgrounds.   
 
Save the C hildren ’s recommendation : Taking account of the advantages and challenges of 
Education Technology  
There has been a considerable growth in the use of technology in education programmes 
across the international education community and in most domestic education systems led by 
national governments. For many children, being able to  expand  their learning and knowledge is 
one of the most important benefits to being online.  
Despite the considerable promise of EdTech to support positive changes in increasing access 
to quality education, the potential of EdTech is accompanied by several interrelated challenges.  
Within the Education Technology sector, national governments, bilateral and multi -lateral 
donors, civil society and the private s ector should focus upon:  
• Ensuring access and equity  
• Prioritising inclusive education  
• Shifting power in EdTech programmes  to empower children  to make informed 
decisions about their online learning  
• Ensuring children’s and teachers rights to participate in the design and use of 
EdTech  
Ensuring child friendly tech products and safer EdTech use for children .14 
 
Protect Data  
 
Save the Children ’s recommendation s: Ensure children’s right to privacy.   
Children are demanding more information about how their data is collected, stored and used, 
greater protection of their privacy, and less surveillance by commercial entities and parents.  
 
13 UNICEF, Are Children Really Learning? Exploring foundational skills in the midst of a learn ing crisis (2022) 
https://data.unicef.org/resources/are -children -really -learning -foundational -skills -report/  
14 For more information on this track see Save the Chil dren EdTech for Whom? Ensuring Safe and Equitable use of 
EdTech for Children (2022) https://resourcecentre.savethechildren.net/pdf/Advocacy -brief -EdTech -final.pdf /  
 
 Governments and businesses have a responsibility to ensure that any actions taken to keep 
children safe are proportionate to children’s right to privacy and their freedom of expression.  
 
Save the Children ’s recommendations : Improving national data systems  
 
Disaggregated data and monitoring of violations of children’s rights is critical to ensuring 
evidenced -based action to tackle crime and ensure perpetrators are held to account. There 
needs to be better measures of the prevalence of child sexual exploitatio n and abuse in every 
country to assess trends and progress towards its elimination. Accountability and  data 
collection efforts need to be owned by national governments  rather than private institutions  
to ensure children's data is protected under the responsibility of the state and by law.  
Governments should:  
Strengthen national administrative data systems to track the delivery of services to children 
disaggregated by age and sex at a minimum, as well as disability status and other factors 
where safe and feasible, with relevant links across borders.  
 
 
Apply Human Right Online  
 
Save the C hildren ’s recommendations : Ensure meaningful participation of children  
Children have a right to participate in the decisions that affect them. We cannot design or 
shape policies and interventions without the participation of those affected.  To effectively 
recognise children’s rights in the digital environment it is critical for all stakeholders work to 
ensure the digital space is safe so that children  and adolescents can meaningfully and safely 
participate in the issues that affect them.  
Governments, companies and civil society stakeholders should take steps to strengthen 
children’s agency, including by:  
Establishing mechanisms for the ongoing engagement of children in the regulation of the 
digital environment , including in the design of remediation and prevention systems.  
Participation should be ongoing so that as the digital environment changes, children’s 
perspectives can be incorporated.  
Taking steps toward increasing children’s safe access to the digital environment so that they 
may m ore effectively participate in decision -making, with a special emphasis on reaching 
children most likely to be impacted by marginalisation or discrimination such as adolescent 
girls, children with disabilities, and children living in humanitarian contexts.   
 
Save the C hildren ’s recommendations : Ensure children are safe online  
In a fast -changing digital ecosystem, the nature of risk is continually evolving, sometimes 
exposing children to emerging risks well before adults know how to mitigate them.15 
 
15 SSAOR, Livingstone, Sonia; Stoilova, Mariy “The 4Cs: Classifying Online Risk to Children” (2021) 
https://www.ssoar.info/ssoar/bitstream/handle/document/71817/ssoar -2021 -livingstone_et_al -
The_4Cs_Classifying_Online_Risk.pdf   
 
 The array of risks to children online have been categorised into four areas:16  
● ‘content’  risks (e.g. exposure to harmful or age -inappropriate material);  
● ‘contact’  risks (e.g. exposure to unsolicited contact from adults);  
●  ‘conduct’  risks (e.g. cyberbullying); and  
●  ‘contract’  risks (e.g. data harvesting, commercial pressure and exhortations to 
gamble).  
 
Governments and companies have key roles to play in supporting children and parents in 
keeping children safe from harm online. Paren tal guidance also plays an important role in 
helping them to engage with digital technologies safely and meaningfully, and in ways that 
support the realisation of their rights.  
 
Preventing and responding to violence against children, including gender -based  violence , in 
digital contexts.  
Children have highlighted that the digital environment exposes them to risks of harm 
associated with inappropriate content, bullying, discrimination and harassment, sexual 
exploitation, catfishing, and even kidnap or murder.17 
Some children are at increased risks of experiencing violence, exploitation and abuse through 
online forums. For example, the first experience of online harassment for many girls with 
access to digital devices and the internet, is aged 14 -16.18 
Governments must:  
● Build a protective environment for all children by integrating the prevention of 
TFGBV and online child sexual exploitation and abuse into existing systems, 
rather than dealing with it as a singular issue. This will help ensure systemic 
responses to support and respond to harms resulting from online activities are 
available and adequately equipped and resourced.  
● Ensure that specific groups of children who face specific safety risks in digital 
spaces, including children with disabilities a nd girls, are able to safely access, use 
and create technology and online content.  
● Provide fast and effective responses and remedies to violence when it occurs; as 
well as to ensure transparency reporting from technology intermediaries on the 
nature and ex tent of the problem, and the actions taken in response.  
● Tackle disinformation and misinformation online and support  media literacy, 
children’s critical reading and thinking capabilities, fostering trust in democratic 
institutions .   
● Increase cooperation of  the technology sector with civil society organisations, 
including  children and their organizations and networks and   national human 
rights institutions , to ensure that technology companies and intermediaries 
 
16 SSAOR, Livingstone, Sonia; Stoilova, Mariy “The 4Cs: Classifying Online Risk to Children” (2021) page 6 
https://www.ssoar.info/ssoar/bitstream/handle/ document/71817/ssoar -2021 -livingstone_et_al -
The_4Cs_Classifying_Online_Risk.pdf   
17 https://5rightsfoundation.com/uploads/OurRIghtsinaDigitalWorld -FullReport.pdf   
18 Plan International, Policy Brief for Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) (2023)  
 
 strengthen transparency, accountability, polic ies and measures to ensure the 
protection of children through both prevention and response.  
● Support parents, caregivers and children through training designed with input 
from children on measures to ensure children safely access technology.  
● Ensure that te acher’s curriculum includes orientation on how to safely access 
technology and avoid risks when using digital tools.  
 
Accountability for discrimination and misleading conten t 
 
Save the C hildren ’s recommendations  Ensure children’s mental health and wellbeing online!  
 
Children and young people today have grown up in an era of digital technology and been 
familiar with computers, mobile devices and the internet from an early age.  
For refugees and children on the move, in particular, the connective potential of digital 
technologies can play a significant role in maintaining contact with family in their home 
countries, supporting social connectedness as key to psychosocial  wellbeing.19 
Nevertheless, the internet can also be a space that has the potential to harm children’s 
mental health, including viewing harmful content, cyberbullying, and increased pressure to 
look or act a certain way. Research has found that a little bit of internet use is positive, while 
excessive use has a negative impact on mental wellbeing .20  
Children have also consistently drawn attention to cyberbullying having particularly 
detrimental impacts on their mental health and have raised concerns about the serious long -
term mental health impacts on children that experience violence online.21 
Discrimination, under -representation or misrepresentation of minority groups online can also 
negatively impact the development and validation of children’s cultural and religious 
identities – particularly during the critical phase of adolescence – and can a lso result in 
poorer mental health and wellbeing outcomes.22 
It is important to note children’s evolving capacities and those vulnerable in other 
circumstances who may be more vulnerable to and at heightened risk of experiencing 
violations of their protect ion online.  
Social media and images  depicted for example can distort self -image or even stimulate 
harmful behaviours, such as getting information on losing weight in a risky manner (can lead 
to eating disorders), or information on how to self -harm. It is also important to note that 
images and videos on social media that are not trauma -sensitive can trigger traumatic 
experiences from the past and affect mental health and should be taken into consideration 
for children’s engagement online.  
 
19 Udwan, G, Leurs, K & Alencar, A (2020). ‘Digital Resilience Tactics of Syrian Refugees in the Netherlands: Social 
Media for Social Support, Health, and Identity’, Social Media + Society, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1 -11. As cited in 
https://5rightsfoundation.com/uploads/OurRIghtsinaDigitalWorld -FullReport.pdf   
20 OECD, Children and Young People Mental Health in the Digital Age (2018) https://www.oecd.org/els/health -
systems/Children -and-Young -People -Mental -Health -in-the-Digital -Age.pdf   
21 https://5rightsfoundation.com/uploads/OurRIghtsinaDigitalWorld -FullReport.pdf   
22 Brown, CS (2015). The Educational, Psycho logical and Social Impact of Discrimination on the Immigrant Child 
(Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute) as cited in 
https://5rightsfoundation.com/uploads /OurRIghtsinaDigitalWorld -FullReport.pdf   
 
 In addition to the  other recommendations set out in this paper, governments and the private 
sector should:  
● Empower children and young people to use digital technology well, so they 
can further reap the benefits that social media can provide.  
● Educate families about appropr iate digital use and risks and strengthen 
capacities to support their children to stay safe and well.  
● Encourage industry to develop appropriate accessible  and trauma -sensitive  
content.  
● Ensure children and young people who show signs of mental health condi tions 
or concerns to get help early.  
 
Digital commons as a global public good   
Save t he Children ’s Recommendation : Ensure respect for Child Rights and Business 
Principles - Including Tech Industry A ction and Innovation  
Dedicated attention to child rights and business in the digital environment is increasingly 
critical as digital technology has permeated daily life and changed the world – and it is 
increasingly changing childhoods as more and more ch ildren, parents and caregivers spend 
more time online.  
States remain the primary duty bearers for the fulfilment of children’s rights, and have the 
obligation to ensure that businesses meet those responsibilities. Where there are systemic 
adverse business  impacts on children, legislative and regulatory action may be the most 
effective action.   
States must :  
● Adopt and properly  resource the implementation of  comprehensive child online 
safety policies based on children’s rights to access the digital world in  ways that 
are safe and secure.  
● Ensure businesses with control of online environments conduct comprehensive 
human rights and environmental due diligence that integrate child rights. Actions 
must assess impacts across operations and value chains, establish saliency, and 
lead to changing  practices to address risks to children’s rights in the digital 
environment.  
● Ensure Big Tech platforms disclose adequate information about how they 
conduct human rights due diligence, moderate online content, test and deploy 
algorithmic systems, and use personal data.  
 
Businesses, as the developers, providers and owners of a vast proportion of the digital 
environment, and who play a key role in ensuring Safety by Design, are integral to protec ting 
children. Businesses m ust respect children’s rights and prevent and remedy abuse of their 
rights in relation to the digital environment.  
 
Governments and companies, including digital service providers:  
 
 ● Must adopt and properly resource the implementation of comprehensive child 
online safety policies based on children’s rights to access the digital world in 
ways that are safe and secure.  
● Must be held accountable and liable for the welfare of children and young people 
in the digital environment, and a stronger duty of care to children by such 
companies and digital service providers must be established.  
● Should ensure that online services apply the safety by design principle in 
solutions they develop for children.  
● Should collect and/or commission appropriate and lawful collection  of data and 
research on the scale of the problems facing children in the digital environment.23 
 
Save t he Children ’s Recommendation : Scale up investment.  
 
Funding remains a critical resource in delivering positive change for children rights in regards 
to the digital spa ce. To ensure our legal and regulatory frameworks are  recognising children’s 
rights,  governments should:  
Increase investments to scale -up solutions that keep children safe, particularly those that 
tackle grooming and distribution of child sexual abuse mate rial (CSAM ). 
Apply a proportion of taxation of digital companies in their home countries and the markets 
where they have business activities and earn profits to supporting the rights of children in the 
digital environment as set out in the recommendations in General comment 25.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 Recommendations above are drawn from UNICEF, UN Global Compact, Save the Children Charting the Course: 
Embedding Children's Rights in Responsible Business  (2022)  which r eviews progress on embedding children's rights 
in responsible and sustainable business conduct.  
 
  
Annex - background information  for Save the Children ’s vision and exp erience 
around  safe digital  childhood.  
Through programming and advocacy interventions Save the Children will be seeking to drive 
impact for children in three focused areas:  
• Protection  - Preventing and addressing online sexual abuse, exploitation, misinformation 
and radicalisation  
• Participation  - Increasing digital inclusion, skill -building & involvement in influencing 
change to recognise their rights, accessing information & creating laws and policies that are 
fit for purpose and informed by childr en’s views  
• Well -being  - Improving children’s resilience, critical thinking skills,  mental health and well -
being  
 
What has Save the Children done to support a safe digital childhood?  
1. Education and training for Online Child Protection & EdTech  
2. Anti -cyberbullying activities (many SC countries)  
3. Adoption of existing technologies for Online Child Protection  
a)    Child Wise  licensing agreement with NetClean  (SC Australia)  
b)  Translation to Khmer and cultural adaptation of the National Center for Miss ing and Exploited 
Children’s  Cloud Chaos  mobile game for Cambodian context (SC Cambodia)  
4. Creation of new technologies for Online Child Protection  
a)    Developed a prototype Anti-grooming chatbot  for using artificial intelligence (AI) Natural 
Language Programming (NLP)to identify grooming in online chats in  media such as online 
games or social media (SCUS)  
b)    Developed a prototype mobile application  to allow children and concerned adults to report 
online abuse reporting  (SC Sri Lanka)  
c)  Developed the Safe Place application  to support the mental health of children and young 
people in Sweden between the ages of 7 -18 who feel worried, scared or sad. The application 
was translated into Ukrainian to support refugees in Sweden and, during the invasion of their 
home country, saw a spike in users within Ukraine.  
d)  Developing My Town, a mobile friendly digital platform aimed at increasing feelings of home 
and belonging by enabling peer -generated information sharing and connecting migrant and 
displaced adolescents to one another and their communities. My Town will be co -developed 
with migr ant and displaced youth, and will be piloted in Stockholm, Sweden and Warsaw, 
Poland.  
 
5.    Child protection helplines  & guidance  
a)    Helpline  in (Zambia) for reporting both online and offline child abuse and neglect, and 
INHOPE -affiliated hotlines  for reporting Child Sexual Abuse Materials (Denmark, Finland, 
Romania and Ital y). 
 
 b)    Antivirus against violence  Guide and online course providing  parents with basic knowledge 
and tools to help them educate and accompany children in the use of information 
technologies for responsible and safe use. (Spain)  
c)     Developing a prototype t oolbox to combat gender -based violence among adolescents in 
digital environment. B orn from a research conducted in different schools in Spain using the 
behavioral science approach to uncover structural, informational and behavioral barriers to 
GBV among adolescents in Spain, and design and test behaviorally informed so lutions .   
6.    Strengthening child protection systems  
a)    Recognised as a lead agency in child protection system strengthening, holding global 
conferences in this area and creating and child pr otection systems strengthening  guidance  
b)    Steps to Protect  Common Approach on focused on child protection case management  
7.    Advocacy & policy  
a)    Advocacy brief: EdTech for Whom? Ensuring Safe and Equitable EdTech use for Children  
b)    Supported advocacy (including child participation) for  UN General comment No. 25 on 
children’s rights in relation to the digital environment (2021)  
c)     UNICEF, UN Global Compact, Save the Children Charting The Course:  
Embedding Children's Rights in Responsible Business  (2022)  
d)    Currently supporting advocacy messages and children’s engagement in:  
·          Commission of the Status of Women (March 2023)  
·          HRC Annual Day on the Rights of the Child and the Digital Environment  
·          Resolution for the rights of the child at UNGA 3rd Committee (Sept 2023)  
·          Summit of the Future (Sept 2024)  to have a first global compact on digital rights  
8.    Researc h 
a)    Child -centered research  on online violence against children  
b)     Viral Violence  report (2019) . Analysis on the types of online violence, the possible risk 
factors and the consequences of suffering from such violence. Data gathered through an 
online survey with almost 400 young people between 18 and 20 years of age in Spain, to 
see whether and to wh at extent they were affected by any of the types of online 
violence during their childhood and adolescence.  
c)     I Will Not Play That Game  report (2016) . Addresses the concepts of bullying and 
cyberbullying, throu gh a survey of 21,487 students between 12 and 16 years of age. The 
aim of the survey was to explore and analyze adolescents' experiences of bullying, cyber -
bullying and other related experiences.  
d)    Research on  Digital Safeguarding for Migrating and Displaced Children  
e)    EdTech for Learning in Emergencies and Displaced Settings: A rigorous review and 
narrative synthesis.  
f)    Currently supporting child participatory research with funding from Global Partnership to 
End Violence Against Children (GPEVAC) on how children p erceive, experience, and 
respond to online grouping with Western Sydney University.  
 