1 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  Artificial General Intelligence  Issues and Opportunities  
 
Abstract  
National g overnments and multi -lateral organizations like the European Union , OECD , 
and UNESCO  have identified values and principles for artificial narrow intellige nce and 
national strategies for its development. But little attention has been given to identifying 
the beneficial initial conditions  for future Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). The initial 
conditions for AGI will determine if Artificial Super Intelligence will evolve to benefit 
humanity or not. Even if international agreements are reached on the beneficial initial 
conditions for AGI, a global governance system  will still be needed to enforce them and 
oversee the development and management of AGI. Since it may take ten, twenty, or 
more years to create and ratify an international AGI treaty and establish a global AGI 
governance system , and since some experts beli eve it is possible to have AGI within 
ten to twenty years, it is therefore important to work on these issues as soon as 
possible.  The most critical AGI issues are its initial conditions and global governance.  
These issues are important for governments to g et right from the outset.  
 
Introduction /Background  
 
AI is advancing so rapidly, that some experts believe th at artificial general intelligence 
(AGI)  could occur before the end of this decade1; hence, it is time to begin serious 
deliberations about AGI. There are three categories of Artificial Intelligence  (AI):  
narrow, general, and supe r.  
 
Artificial Narrow Intelligence  (ANI) sometimes called weak AI is the kind of AI or 
machine learning that we have today: each software application has a single specific 
purpose. However, generalist agents are being created tha t can perform several 
functions, but not as general and creative as AGI.   
 
Artificial General Intelligence  (AGI)  sometimes called strong  AI is similar to human 
capacity for novel problem -solving and reasoning whose goals are set by humans. It 
can: a ddress complex  problems without pre -programing like ANI requires;  initiate 
searches for information worldwide ; use sensors and the Internet of Things (IoT) to 
learn ; make phone calls and interview people ; make logical deductions ; re-write or edit 
its code to be more intelligent …continually, so it gets smarter and smarter, faster and 
faster than humans . Some believe this could happen within ten years2; some others 
argue that AGI is impossible for many more years, if ever.3 Although there is no 
consensus  within the AI community, so me would say AGI will have a unique form of 
sentience . 
 
Artificial Super Intelligence  (ASI) is AGI that becomes so advanced that it sets its own 
goals and strategies independent of human awareness or understanding . It is most 
likely to emerge from AGI .4 It is unknow n how fast ASI could emerge from AGI . It could 
be almost immediately, or years, or never. Hence, research & innovation policy should 
consider a range of possibilities.  Allan Dafoe, of DeepMind and the Future of Humanity 
2 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  Institute, University of Oxford , says that “t he governance of AI is the most important 
issue facing humanity today5…” Elon Musk believes that the single, most pressing 
existential issue we face is how the advent of ASI is or is not symbiotic with humanity6.  
 
1. Current Situation  
 
AGI does not exist . President Putin has said whoever leads AI will rule the world . China 
plans to lead international competition by 20307. Although “AGI” or “Artificial General 
Intelligence” does not appear in the State Council Notice on the Issuance of the Next 
Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan: A Next Generation Artificial 
Intelligence Development Plan  (Released: July 20, 2017 ), terms such as “ strong 
generalization capabilities …AI key general technology system …cross-medium 
analytical reasoning technology ” does seem like AGI and the plan states that China will 
be “occupying  the commanding heights of AI technology. ” Since ANI is with us now, one 
can assume th at President Putin and the Chinese Plan were referring to AGI. Therefore, 
it is also reasonable to assume that t he “Great AGI Race ” is on with both governments 
and corporations. I n such a race, Deep Mind Co-founder and CEO  Demis Hassabis said 
people may cut corners making future AGI less safe.  Adding to this race are the Brain 
Projects8 in the EU, USA, China and Japan, and other n euroscience advances.   
 
Estimates on financial i nvestment s into AGI development vary widely. Government 
classified funding into AGI is unknown. Microsoft alone invested $1 billion into OpenAI  
during 2021. And one estimate between 2018 an d 20239 projects a total of $50 billion . A 
survey in 2020, found 72  project s working on AGI development in 37 countries .10 Expert 
judgments about when AGI will be possible  also vary broadly . Some working to develop 
AGI believe it is possible within  ten years .11 12Others think it is impossible to ever be 
achieve d. Definitions of AGI also vary . Many say it is human level intelligence or 
capacity. However, there are m any forms of ANI today that are already beyond human 
capacity or human level intelligence  such as:  
 
• Protein folding: AlphaFold by 
DeepMind  
• Lip reading:  LipNet by Deep Mind  
• Playing games : Chess: Deep 
Blue by IBM ; and Jeopardy & Go: 
AlphaGo  and AlphaZ ero 
• Live voice translation : Microsoft  
• Mathematics  
• Flying planes, driving trucks  
• Face recognition  
• Medical diagnosis  • Reading comprehension speed 
Microsoft and Alibaba  
• Legal analysis : LawGeex  
• Income tax preparation:  
TurboTax  
• Organizing shipping : Amazon  
• Specific research : Google; Alexa  
• Traffic navigation : Google Maps  
• AI/robots for repetitive tasks  
• Large scale data analysis  
• Autonomous vehicles  
 
One way to understand the distinction between ANI and AGI is an analogy with the 
human body. Just as the autonomous nervous system  includes many narrow pu rpose 
systems (respiratory, skeletal, digestive, etc.) that manages much of our body, freeing 
3 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  the mind to be creative, so too many ANI systems are being put in place to run much of 
the urban infrastructure , which  will free much of humanity toward a self-actualization  
economy13.  
 
Usually,  large amounts of data are used to make the ANI agent smart . Although 
DeepMind used volumes of data from expert games  to train Alpha Go to defeat world 
champions, it developed AlphaZero  with no data i nput other than the rules of Go.  In 
2017, AlphaZero learn ed by playing against a copy of itself, and in just three days was 
able to be at AlphaGo14. 
 
The work on ANI values is well underway around the world and progress is being made 
on standards  and regulations, but not for AGI. The International Organization for 
Standardization and the Electrotechnical Commission - ISO/IEC Joint Technical 
Committee for Information Technology created a standards sub -committee for Artificial 
Intelligence (SC 42) jointly lead by the US and China.  The ISO standard s have been 
released and the IEEE will do so in a few months (the author is a voting member of the 
IEEE P2863 AI governance standards working group) but these too just look at ANI.  
 
1.1 Driving Forces  
1. Political power  – Putin’s statement, China’s 2030 goal , zero -sum geopolitical 
power motivation .  
2. Advances in cognitive science that could be applied to algorithms (Human brain 
projects in the US, EC, China, and Japan ). 
3. Increasing  funding allocated to AGI research in corporations; e.g., Demis 
Hassabis  with DeepMind ; OpenAI lead by Sam Altman; Facebook ’s FAIR  with 
Yann LeCun  (one of the fathers of deep learning ); Alibaba has Alibaba A.I. Labs, 
Baidu has Baidu Research ; Tencent has the Tencent AI Lab ; and the Beijing 
Academy of Artificial Intelligence has Wu Dao.  
4. Increases in computer capacity including progress with q uantum computing . 
5. Increasing volume and organization of data .  
6. Collaborative , synergetic efforts like Si ngularityNet  sharing and selling algorithms  
and code  and potential for transfer learning . 
7. Increasing democratization of AI tools and education . 
8. The human desires for achievement, excitement, and having greater impact with 
less effort.  
 
1.2 Gray area between Narrow and General  – General Purpose AI  
Large planforms are being created of ma ny ANIs such as Gato15 by DeepMind of 
Alphabet which is a deep neural network that can perform 604 different tasks from 
managing a robot to recognizing images and playing games – it is not AGI, but Gato is 
more than the usual ANI: “The same network with the same weights can play Atari, 
caption images, chat, stack blocks with a real robot arm and much m ore, deciding 
based on its context whether to output text, joint torques, button presses, or other 
tokens .16 Also the Wu Dao 2.0 by the Beijing Academy  of Artificial Intelligence17 has 
1.75 trillion parameters18 trained from both text and graphic data . This allows it to 
4 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  genera te new text and images on command and has its virtual student (Hua Zhibing ) 
that learns from WuDwo 2.0 .19 
 
AGI should not be confused with General Purpose AI Systems (GPAIS)20 which is 
defined as an AI system  “able to perform generally applicable functions such as  
image/speech recognition, audio/video generation, pattern detection, question  
answering, translation etc.  These systems rely on “transfer learning” applying 
knowledge  from one task to another. ChatGPT21 is an upgrade from GPT -3 to GPT-3.5 
that can generate human -like text and perform a wide range of language tasks such as 
translation, summarization, and question answering. (GPT -3 uses 175 billion machine 
learning parameters. ) ChatGPT  interacts with the user to produce sophisticated text 
from simple instru ctions or questions.  See Appendix for an example of how it answered 
the first question in the second section below. It can  also write and correct code, write 
music in different styles, organize information, and  other uses being inv ented now. 
SingularityNet is also in this gray area.  It brings together AI developers who want to 
create AGI and share code such that AGI might emerge from many interactions. The 
Athens Round table  held at the European Parliament  on 1-2 December 2022  did discuss 
General Purpose AI, but not AGI.  The Future of Li fe Institute has assessed General 
Purpose AI and the AI Act ,22 but not AGI.  
 
1.3 Some Current Questions About Future AGI  
AGI is expected to address novel and extremely complex problems by initiating 
research strategies from exploring t he Internet of Things (IoT), interviewing expert s, 
making logical deductions, learning from experience and reinforcement without the need 
for its own massive databases, and co ntinually editing and re -writing its own code to 
continually improve its own intelligence. An AGI might be tasked to create plans and 
strategies to avoid war, protect  democracy and human rights, manag e complex urban 
infrastructures, meet climate change  goals, counter transnational organized crime, and 
manage water -energy -food availability .  
 
To achieve such abilities without the future nightmares of science fiction, global 
agreements with all relevant countries and corporations will be needed. To achieve 
such an agreement or set of agreement s, many questions should be addressed.  For 
example:   
 
• How to manage the international cooperation necessary to build international 
agreements and a governance system while nations and corporations are in an 
intellectual “arms race” for global leadership. (IAEA and nuclear weapon treaties 
did create governance systems during the Cold War  arms race .) 
• And related: How can international agreements and a governance system 
prevent an A GI “arms race ” and escalation fr om going faster than expected, 
getting out of control and leading to war, be it kinetic, algorithmic, cyber, or 
information warfare?  
• How can international treaties and a governance system prevent increased 
centralization of power crowding out others?  
5 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  • If IAEA, ITU, WTO, and other international governance bodies were created 
today, how would officials of such agencies create them differently, and what 
advice might they give for creating uniquely complex  and dynamic AGI 
governance?  
• Drawing on the work of the Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) 
and others that have already identified norms, principles, and values, what will be 
the most acceptable combination or hierarchy of values as the basis for 
international treati es and a governance system?  
• How can a governance model help assure an AGI is aligned with acceptable 
global values , priorities among values, and accommodate future changes or 
additions to values ?  
• How can a governance model correct undesirable action unant icipated in utility 
functions?  
• How to develop and enforce AGI algorithm audit standards?   
• How can the use of ANI -to-AGI by organized crime and terrorism be reduced or 
prevented?  
• To what degree do  AGI thought leaders and primary stakeholders agree about 
the framing of governance issues?  
• Should an international governance trial, test, or experiment be constructed first 
with a single focus (e.g., health or climate change), and then to learn the rules 
and standards from such experiences to extend to broader gov ernance of the 
transition from ANI to AGI?  
• Should AGI have rights?  If so, which ones?  
• How can governance be flexible enough to respond to new issues previously 
unknown at the time of creating that governance system  and old issues 
reinterpreted in the futur e? 
 
Since the EC has led on some complex multilateral agreements, it could perform a great 
service by addressing some of these questions.  
 
1.4 Relationship between quantum computing and AGI  
Quantum computing could speed -up the arrival of AGI by improving and running 
machine learning algorithms.23  Quantum computing is progressing rapidly  and likely to 
be quite advanced when AGI arrives : Both IBM and Google  announced they plan to 
have a 1 -million -cubit chip by 2030 . Assuming massive engineering problems can be 
solved as the number of qubit s increases, i t is expected th at quantum computing  will be 
able to create very  large,  complex simulations.  Over the next ten to twenty years the 
nature of the simulations produced by future quantum commuting might evolve to be 
able to test AGIs alignment with stated values in many more  situations tha n currently 
available  today . If so, t his could be one future approach to auditing and certifying an 
AGI for a license p rior to public use . 
  
6 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  1.5 Some Examples of Potential  Beneficial Initial Conditions for AGI  
Since the initial conditions for AGI will determine or at least influence how beneficia l ASI 
will be for humanity , special attention should be giv en to identifying, assessing, and as 
possible , testing these conditions. The following list is offered to simulate discussion to  
more rigorously create initial conditions that might be more carefully defined with 
metrics suitable for audits,  and that could be used for future licensing possibilities.   
 
• Values agreed to for ANI24 e.g., ISO, IEEE, and OECD25.  
• Massively complex simulation s to test AGI’s alignment with values . 
• Able to be continuously audited.  
• Contain an automatic off -switch (or a signal to Interpol for automatic closure) 
when a failure during the continual audit is detected.  
• Ability to distinguish between  how we act vs. how we should act.  
• Ability for humans to check why the AGI is doing something  questionable or 
undesirable . A pause command that traces back to see how/who/when the AGI 
made the decision that led to the undesirable action, and then can be a mended 
(patched?), interacting with a human. However, such patches could build up 
overtime, creating their own anomalies ; this has to be considered . 
• Self-replication with human supervision.  
• Cannot turn off its own off -switch.  An over -ride switch - allows AGI to be switched 
off by a human.  
• Explain how it is possible t o build AGI that is more intelligent than humans but 
does not have more power than humans ? 
• Transfer learning elements should be pre-audit approved before added to an AGI  
and unsupervised learning . 
• Guard rails to catch unanticipated behavior and side effects that triggers analysis 
to determine cause . 
• Able to stop an AGI that seems to be causing a conflict  that could create a war. 
• Seeks synergies with other AGIs rather than conflicts but notif ies humans if a 
conflict begins . 
• Cannot use subliminal techniques to manipulate humans  for nefarious purposes . 
• AGI developers should be required to keep detailed records  during design and 
development process  access ible by the future governance system .  
• Decision/data logging to recreate a decision and date at the time of an error .  
• Similar to a flight recorder , the AGI should have a log of changes of the neural 
network (not all activity ). 
• Reinforces human development and individual empowerment rather than the 
commoditization of  human beings .  
 
 
2. Distilled Alternative views on the Evolution of ANI to AGI to ASI  
 
2.1. AGI Evolution in Parallel  with Humanity  – In this view, i nitial conditions  for AGI 
incorporate the b est of human values  and safe guards for humanity as determined by 
many working groups such as IEEE, ITU, OECD, UNESCO, the InterAcademy 
7 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  Partnership , and leading corporations working on AGI and university experts . These 
groups define the standards and metrics for AGI audits  and draft text for a multi -lateral 
agreement . Under the convening power of the United Nation, these groups draft the 
international agreement (s) for governing AGI  with e nforcement powers . For example, if 
an AGI fails an audit but did not freeze the program or an unlicensed  AGI was 
discovered, the Interpol would be authorized by the treaty to immediately freeze the 
AGI. Since AGI can continuously re -write its code, the auditing process would have to 
be a continuous  process  not an annual event like a financial audit .  
 
Humans make ethical and unethical decisions . If AGI’s initial conditions include the best 
of human values, then when  AGI takes on autonomous decisioning, its decisionmaking 
should be more ethical than humans as a generalization. Just as ANI will driver cars 
more safely than humans in general, AGI could make a more ethical society.  Much of 
the built environment will be r un by many different ANI s, which in turn could be 
managed by AGI.  
 
Just as the US and the USSR found ways to manage nuclear weapons avoiding World 
War III, the US and China could agree to find ways to collaborate and lead the world to 
stabilize and reverse  climate change26 and manage the development and governance of 
AGI. It became clear that t he rush to get to AGI by governments of USA, China, EU, 
Japan, Russia, and Israel along with corporations like Open Al, DeepMind, Google 
Brain, Baidu, Meta AI, Alibaba and others could mean that insufficient attention would 
be paid to the “right” initial conditions. And in this rush, several AGIs with insufficient 
initial conditions might interact with other AGIs in destructive ways and allow the 
emergen ce of an Artificial Super Intelligence (ASI) in a manner that Hawkin g, Musk, 
Gates, and others war ned about.  As a result, international agreements were reached 
and a governance system was finally put in place. A unique element of the governance 
system was the creation of an AGI that is  tasked  by the UN’s International AGI Agency , 
to continu ally help improve global collaboration among UN agencies, governments, 
businesses, and research institutes for  continual improvement of the governance 
system of AGI for t he benefit of an ever -evolving civilization on Earth and beyond.  In 
short, only an AGI was able to keep up with the evolution of other AGIs and able to help 
govern  them. 
 
2.2 AGI Merger  with Humanit y – This is similar to 2.1 AGI Evolution in Parallel with 
Humanity  except that it develops AGI while ANI is integrated in or on the human body. 
Neuralink27 has created computer extensions thin enough to be inserted next to induvial 
neurons in the brain and record activity28. A mon key with the implan t has played the 
electronic game pong, with thought alone. The goal is to merge future AI with the brain 
to so that AGI and the human can evolve together. “If you can’t beat them, join them .” 
The merger of human and AGI seems the preference of Chinese research29. 
 
Another approach to the AI -brain merger or direct brain to computer interface is 
Synchron with its stentrode device and bluetooth connection that began human trails in 
November 202030. The stentrode electrode was injected in a major bl ood vessel without 
the need for brain surgery that allowed the patients to manage email and other 
8 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  computer operations. It is reasonable to assume these and other related technologies 
will evolve over the next ten to twenty years , intime for AGI and human t hought to 
merge  or become a continuum.  
 
In this view, it is not necessary for all or even most of humanity to be AGI -augmented 
for the co -evolution of human and machine. Just enough for the co -evolution to be 
expressed and tested in enough situations to make the evolution to ASI from AGI to be 
beneficial for humanity.  
 
2.3. Mixed  Complexity , Backing into Agreements, and Science Fiction Nightmares  
The AGI race intensifies among countries and corporations without an international 
agreement for governance. Different AGIs get created differently in different countries , 
corporations , and organized crime. To prevent one AGI from taking over the world and  
the proliferation of organized crime AGIs, international efforts are hastily put together to 
create a management treaty, but there are no enforcement powers for the governance 
system. There are also several AGI systems that evolved from peer -to-peer developers’ 
platforms. These became AGI decentralized autonomous organizations owned  and 
controlled by many people rather than corporations or governments. As the different 
AGIs began to int eract  with each other , ASI emerges from the totality of human 
interactions on the web , Internet of Things, and interreacting various AGI software 
without human awareness, understating, or control31. Things begin happ ening that 
cannot be explained  and then nightmares of science fiction began to proliferate.  
 
3. AGI Issues for R esearch & Innovation  Policy  
 
3.1 Initial Conditions for AGI  
This has been explained above as the first step in creating beneficial AGI for humanity. 
Since it is likely to take ten more years to create AGI, there is time to create the list and 
revisit it ma ny time s. The next step i s to define these conditions so precisely that they 
can be audited by a third party. If the EC will support the development of such a list, it 
should also include audit companies in the assessment to work with software experts on 
how to create a continuous audit software attached to the eventual AGI.  
 
3.2 Centralization vs. Decentralizati on.  
Some fear that centralization of proprietary AGI research within a few governments and 
corporations could lead to a hegemonic power, and further concentration of wealth 
crowd ing out any further AGI competition. China plans to lead international compet ition 
by 203032 and has an advantage of using its vast data from its social credit system. 
Since other leading countries and corporations might also like to be the leader,  it is 
reasonable to assume that the race for AGI central control is occurring  today.  
 
In response to centralized advanced research, the Decentralized AI Alliance with 58 
partners33 is creating a common platform for the exchange of code among advanced AI 
developers to avoid re -inventing the wheel or its spokes, and create s ynergies to 
improve efficiency and speed toward AGI. Other individual examples of decentralized 
platforms for AI developers to cooperate on the peer-to-peer develop ment of  AGI are 
9 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  Cortex , SingularityNet, Matrix AI , and Open Economic Framework of Fetch.ai . Should 
the EU support both centralized AGI by the EC, or decentralized development of AGI, or 
both?   
 
3.3. Are Regulations Blocking Development of AGI a Valid Concern?  
It is argued that creating rules for governance of A GI too soon will stifle it s development.  
Since it is likely to take ten or more years to develop AGI international agreements , 
design an international governance system , and begin implementation , then regulations 
would not be in place soon enough to block early development work for  AGI. This 
concern over -rates how fast international management can be created.  Hence, AGI 
development would have ten or more  years before any regulations would be in place 
and enforceable . 
 
3.4 Ownership and Liability of AGI  and Its Products  
Who will own the intellectual property produced by A GI with participation of many inputs 
from humans , ANI, and sensors around the world?  How should liability be decided and 
who pays for damages caused by AGI? Is it t he auditing company that certified the 
AGI? The government agency that approved the license? The AI programmer  that wrote 
the code?  The company that produced, sold, or rented the AGI? The user that defined 
the purpose, objective, and how the AGI was deplo yed? UNESCO34 offers an online 
course to address these issues. If the human “owner” of an AI/Avatar or digital twin d ies, 
and these ANI s or maybe even and AGI s continues to move around the Internet and 
eventually causes crime s, who is liable? The participa nts in the Athens Roundtable on 
AI and the Law35 are grappling with these issues and a good source for exploring these 
issues  further . Although the y are exploring law related to ANI not AGI ; nevertheless , 
there should be much overlap on the legal issues.  
 
3.5 Anticipating employment and other economic impacts  
Previous technological  revolution s from the agricultural age to  industrial age and on to 
the information age  created more jobs than each age replaced. But the advent of AGI 
and its impacts on employment will be different this time because of: 1) the  acceleration 
of technological change; 2) the  globalization, interactions, and synergies  among NTs  
(Next Technologies such as synthetic biology, nanotechnology, quantum computing, 
3D/4D printing, robots, drones, computational science, as well as both ANI and 
especially AGI ; 3) the existence of a global  platform —the Internet —for simultaneous  
technology transfer with far fewer erro rs in the transfer; 4) standardization of data bases  
and protocols; 5) few plateaus or pauses of  change allowing time for individuals and  
cultures to adjust to the changes; 6) billions of  empowered people in relatively 
democratic  free markets able to initi ate activities; and  7) machines that can learn how 
you do what  you do, and then do it better than you.  Anticipating the possible impacts of 
AGI and preparing for the impacts prior to the advent of AGI could prevent social and 
political instability ,36 as we ll as facilitate it broader acceptance.  
 
3.6 How to Counter Organized Crime’s use of AGI?  
Cybercriminal income is about $1.5 trillion per year37. Its damages cost $3 trillion in 
2015 ; $6 trillion in 2021 ; and now forecast to be $25 trillion by 202538. Since organized 
10 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  crime has some of the best software experts  that money can buy, organized crime could 
invent and deploy new criminal uses of AGI. Even today, p erfectly good contemporary 
ANI software can be re -purposed for deadly purposes  for terrorist and war crimes . For 
example, MegaSyn by Collaborations Pharmaceuticals designed to create new medi cal 
drugs, was tasked to see if it could also come up with toxic substances for bioweapons. 
In less the n six hours over night, it produced a list of 40,000 toxic molecules both know n 
substances and new, unknown substances39. It is reasonable to assume that criminal 
use of AGI could pose even greater threats. Work on the initial beneficial AGI conditions  
should include how to prevent organized crime ’s use of A GI. The United Nations 
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute has opened the Centre for Artificial 
Intelligence and Robotics  to explore this issue; and hence, the EC should collaborate 
with this center in research and policy innovation in this issue .  
 
3.7 Information Warfare  
Information warfare (as different than cyber warfare that attacks computers, software, 
and command control systems) manipulates information trusted by targets without their 
awareness, so that the targets will make decisions against their interest but in the 
interest of the one conducting information warfare40. ANI is increasingly manipulating 
perceptions of truth, while the public does not know how to defend itself . “Deep fakes” 
are increasingly being used with impu nity. With AGI, the manipulation of truth is likely to 
become far worse , but AGI could also be tasked to counter disinformation.  
 
3.8 AGI Governance  
Since ASI can evolve from AGI without human awareness and understanding, the only 
way to influence ASI’s re lations to humanity —it seems —is a governance system of the 
initial conditions for AGI. Such a g overnance system poses unique challenges : 1) it 
should be dynamic enough to keep up with and even anticipate AGI’s changes; 2) it 
should be enforceable globally, otherwise an AGI could be created  without the 
beneficial initial conditions that evolve s eventually to be destru ctive; and 3) it should be 
established before AGI exists,  otherwise the speed of AGI’s  evolution would beyond the 
ability for regulations and governance to catch up. Each of these seem unfeasible; 
taken together , it seems  impossible41. Of course, circumnavigating the globe, human 
flight and landing on the moon were also thought impossible. Although successful 
governance of AG I seems impossible  today , it has to be pursued , otherwise the 
evolution to ASI is left to chance  and the possibility of alternative nightmare scenarios . 
Allan Dafoe, of DeepMind and the Future of Humanity Institute, University of Oxford , 
says that “t he governance of AI is the most important issue facing humanity today42…” 
During the Asilomar conference on Beneficial AI43, Elon Musk said: “Can government 
speed keep up with AGI growth speed? … We need regulation. ” and Demis Hassabis , 
CEO of DeepMind added , “…it’s good to start the conversation now ” [about AGI 
governance].   
 
Assuming a governance system would include the requirement that an AGI and its use 
be licensed, and a license would require an audit, the n any audit software would also 
have to be conne cted to the AGI so that it would continually be auditing and evolv ing 
with the AGI on a continual basis.  Other issues that should be addressed in the 
11 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  development of a governance system include: Can an AGI be inspected if it does not 
want to be inspected , hiding its newly and constantly rewritten code ? Can an algorithm 
be prevented from knowing how it  is evaluated ? Are off -switches possible in AGI ?  
Specific regulations should be tailored differently for each: software developers, sales 
companies, buyers, a nd users . Would state registry trade secrets of AGI’s be constantly 
out of date as it changes ? How to verify that an AGI system is being built according the 
rules  prior to an audit ? How to ensure that an algorithm should not learn how to prevent 
human intervention  – but there are cases where this would not be desirable – how to 
address?   
 
3.9 Some potential governance models  
 
1. IAEA -like model or WTO -like with enforcement powers . These are the easiest to 
understand, but likely to be too static to manage AGI.  
2. IPCC -like model in concert with international treaties .  This approached has not 
led to a governance system for climate change.  
3. International S&T Organization (ISTO) as an online real -time global collective 
intelligence system; governance by in formation power . This would be useful to 
help select and use an AGI system, but no proof that information power would be 
sufficient t o govern the evolution of AGI.  
4. GGCC (Global Governance Coordinating Committees) would be flexible  and 
enforced by national sanctions, ad hoc legal rulings in different countries, and 
insurance premiums . This has too many ways for AGI developers to avoid 
meeting standards .  
5. UN, ISO and /or IEEE standards used for auditing and licensing. Licensing would 
affect purchases and would  have impact, but requires international agreement of 
all countries ratifying.   
6. Put different parts of AGI governance under different bodies like ITU, WTO, 
WIPO . Some of this is like ly to happen b ut would not be sufficient to govern all 
instances of AGI s ystems.  
7. Decentralize Semi -Autonomous TransInstitution . This could be the most 
effective, but the most difficult  to establish  since both Decentralize Semi -
Autonomous  Organizations  and TransInstitutions are new concepts . 
 
Conclu ding Recommendations  
 
1. Since it may be difficult to get the major countries and corporations in agreement on 
an AGI treaty text, the EU could take the leadership to develop the EU’s text. Such a 
text could be used to help speed the agreements among the other na tions and 
corporations for an AGI treaty.  
2. Coordinate with other international organizations like the OECD, ITU, WTO, Global 
Partnership on AI (GPAI), and the UNSG’s Office to begin discussions with leading 
AGI governments, corporations, NGOs, and universit ies for an AGI treaty . 
3. Since the private sector i s increasingly  involved  in the development of AGI , it is likely 
to occur regardless of government and mult i-lateral organizations  involvement , but 
12 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org  AGI’s  regulation will not occur without government and multi-lateral involvement . 
Hence, the EC and other multi -lateral organizations should lead in the development 
of international agreements on AGI.  
4. Issue calls for research to develop the beneficial initial conditions for AGI  and 
governance models to enforce  them.  
5. Issue c alls for how auditing firms could develop unique auditing systems for AGI . 
6. Begin d iscuss ion with Interpol on enforcement that includes preventing illegal 
development, use, and sales of AGI . 
7. Manifesto on Enforcing Law in the Age of “Artificial Intelligence:” Transatlantic 
Reflection Group on Democracy and the Rule of Law in the Age of “Artificial 
Intelligence ”44 recommendations are in line with this paper;  however,  they address 
ANI more than AGI ; nevertheless, these recommendations s hould be considered in 
the development of text for a future AGI treaty.  
8. Invest in education and training of EC professionals to manage the transition from 
ANI to AGI.  
9. Consider if the EU should give AI to lower income countries to avoid other  countries 
or corporations making unregulated ANI and AGI  available , if international 
agreements are not yet completed and enforced . 
 
 
End Notes  
 
1 When will singularity happy? 995 experts’ options on AGI  (updated September 26, 2022)    
https://research.aimultiple.com/artificial -general -intelligence -singularity -timing/   
2 Artificial General Intelligence: The Future Of Decision AI  https://datatechvibe.com/ai/artificial -general -
intelligence -the-future -of-decision -ai/  
3 Why Machines Will Never Rule the World Artificial Intelligence without Fear By Jobst Landgrebe, Barry 
Smith https://www.routledge.com/Why -Machines -Will-Never -Rule-the-World -Artificial -Intelligence -
without/Landgr ebe-Smith/p/book/9781032309934   
4 ASI could evolve in parallel to AGI’s development or sui generis , but this paper assumes it would 
emerge from AGI.  
5 Video of talk by Allan Dafoe https://youtu.be/ug6X67xU7Kg   
6 Elon Musk: ‘Mark my words — A.I. is far more dangerous than nukes’  
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/03/13/elon -musk -at-sxsw -a-i-is-more -dangerous -than-nuclear -weapons.html   
7 State Cou ncil Notice on the Issuance of the Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan  
Released: July 20, 2017 https://d1y8sb8igg2f8e.cloudfront.net/document s/translation -fulltext -8.1.17.pdf   
8 Inventory of Brain Projects Working Group https://www.internationalbraininitiative.or g/inventory -brain -
projects -working -group   
9  Investing in Artificial General Intelligence or AGI  https://www.nanalyze.com/2020/ 12/investing -artificial -
general -intelligence -agi/ and From Microsoft to Baidu, Tech Giants Head -to-Head for Becoming AGI 
Innovator https://www.analyticsinsight.net/microsoft -baidu -tech-giants -head -head -becoming -agi-
innovator/   
10 2020 Survey of Artificial General Intelligence Projects  for Ethics, Risk, and Policy   
https://gcrinstitute.org/papers/055_agi -2020.pdf   
11 AI Multiple, 995  experts ’ opinion: AGI / singularity by 2060 [2021 update]  
https://research.aimultiple.com/artificial -general -intelligence -singularity -timing/ , December 31, 2020  
12 Date Weakly General AI is Publicly Known  https://www.metaculus.com/questions/3479/date -weakly -
general -ai-is-publicly -known/   
13 Scenario 3: If Humans were free: the Self -Actualization Economy  in Work/Technology 2050: Scenarios 
and Actions , The Millennium Project, Washington, DC 2020  
13 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org   
14 AlphaGo Zero: Starting from scratch  https://www.deepmind.com/blog/alphago -zero-starting -from-
scratch   
15 https://www.deepmind.com/publications/a -generalist -agent   
16 Overview AI values, principle, an ethic s https://openreview.net/forum?id=1ikK0kHjvj    
17 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence https://www.baai.ac.cn/english.html   
18 Beijing -funded AI language model tops Google and OpenAI in raw numbers 
https://www.scmp.com/tech/tech -war/article/3135764/us -china -tech-war-beijing -funded -ai-researchers -
surpass -google -and  
19 China unveils first domestically developed virtual student  http://en.people.cn/n3/2021/0604/ c90000 -
9857985.html   
20 Council of the European Union General Purpose AI Systems (GPAIS) 
https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST -14278 -2021 -INIT/en/pdf    
21 ChatGPT: Optimizing Language Models for Dialogue  https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/   
22 General Pupose AI and the AI Act , an assessment by the Future of Life Institute 
https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/wp -content/uploads/2022/05/General -Purpose -AI-and-the-AI-Act.pdf   
23 The quantum boost to AI paves the way for AGI  https://dataconomy.com/2022/06/quantum -artificial -
intelligence/    
24 https://wilkins.law.harvard.edu/misc/PrincipledAI_DocumentTimeline.jpg   
25 Global Partnership on AI (GPAI) headquartered at OECD has two C enters of Expertise: one in 
Montréal and one in Paris.  
26 The UN Secretary -General suggested that the US and China lead the world on  agreements and 
programs to address Climate Change during the opening session of the UN COP 27 in Egypt.  
27 https://neuralink.com/   
28 New Brain Implant Begins Human Trials - Neuralink Update!  Video https://youtu.be/M5w8s2PKwxI   
29 China’s “New Generation” AI -Brain Project  https://ndupress.ndu.edu/Media/News/News -Article -
View/Article/2846343/chinas -new-generatio n-ai-brain -project/   
30 https://synchron.com/technology   
31 I tried Warning them , video of Elon Musk discussing ANI 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9LLmUKG9Toc   
32 State Council Notice on the Issuance of the Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan  
Released: July 20, 2017 https://d1y8sb8igg2f8e.cloudfront.net/documents/translation -fulltext -8.1.17.pdf   
33 List of partners of the Decentralized AI Alliance https://daia.foundation/partners/   
34 https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/unesco -global -mooc -ai-and-rule-law-engaged -thousands -judicial -
operators   
35 https://www.aiathens.org/   
36 Glenn, Jerome and the Millennium Project team, Work/Technology 2050: Scenarios and Actions , The 
Millennium Project, Washington, DC, 2020.  
37 https://dataprot.net/statistics/cybercrime -statistics/   
38 Cybercrime to Cost the World $10.5 Trillion Annually by 2025  
https://cybersecurityventures.com/cybercrime -damages -6-trillion -by-2021/  
39 AI Drug Discovery Systems Might Be Repurposed to Make Chemical Weapons, Researchers Warn    
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/ai -drug-discovery -systems -might -be-repurposed -to-make -
chemical -weapons -researchers -warn/   
40 Glenn, J and Millennium Project Team, Global Challenge 10, State of  the Future 19.1 , The Millennium 
Project. Washington, DC 20 21. 
41 Superintelligent AI May Be Impossible to Control; That's the Good News Postcard from the 23rd 
century: Not even possible to know if an AI is superintelligent, much less stop it . 
https://spectrum.ieee.org/super -artificialintelligence   
42 Video of talk by Allan Dafoe https://youtu.be/ug6X67xU7Kg   
43 Video of panel discussion of AGI leaders Elon Musk, Stuart Russell, Ray Kurzweil, Demis Hassabis, 
Sam Harris, Nick Bostrom, David Chalmers, Bart Selman, and Jaan Tallinn , and Max Tegmark 
(moderator)    https://youtu.be/h0962biiZa4   
44 A Manifesto on Enforcing Law in the Age of “Artificial Intelligence” Transatlantic Reflection Group on 
Democracy and the Rule of Law in the Age of “Artificial Intelligence”  10 October 2022, Rome  
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/604b05672bbe0130d9171569/t/63616fa01b1220098eb291a3/1667329952796/A+Manifesto+
on+Enforcing+Law+in+the+Age+of+%E2%80%9CArtificial+Intelligence%E2%80%9D.pdf   
14 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org   
 
 
 
Appendix  
 
ChatCPT Examples  from https://chat.openai.com/   
 
ChatCPT was asked the first question in section 1.3 of this paper:  How to manage the 
international cooperation necessary to build internati onal agreements and a governance 
system while nations and corporations are in an intellectual “arms race” for global 
leadership. And ChatCPT answered:  
 
Managing international cooperation and building international agreements and 
governance systems can be challenging, especially when nations and corporations are 
in competition for global leadership. One approach to addressing this challenge is to 
focus on creating a shared understanding of the benefits of cooperation and the costs of 
not working together. T his can involve fostering dialogue and communication among 
nations and corporations, as well as promoting the development of mutually beneficial 
agreements and policies. Additionally, it may be helpful to establish mechanisms for 
dispute resolution and con flict management to help prevent and address conflicts that 
may arise. Overall, the key to managing international cooperation in this context is to 
find ways to incentivize cooperation and address potential sources of conflict.  
 
A Further q uestion to ChatC PT on this answer  was: What are the benefits of 
international cooperation on the development of artificial general intelligence - AGI? And 
ChatCPT answe red: 
 
There are several potential benefits of international cooperation on the development of 
artificial general intelligence (AGI), including:  
 
Shared resources and expertise: International cooperation can help to pool resources 
and expertise from different nations and corporations, allowing for more rapid and 
effective development of AGI technolo gies.  
 
Improved safety and ethical considerations: By working together, nations and 
corporations can ensure that AGI technologies are developed in a safe and ethical 
manner. This can involve establishing guidelines and protocols for AGI development, as 
well as conducting research on the potential risks and benefits of AGI.  
 
Economic benefits: AGI has the potential to drive significant economic growth and 
innovation. International cooperation can help to ensure that the benefits of AGI are 
shared widely and that all nations and corporations have access to the latest AGI 
technologies.  
 
15 
Jerome.Glenn@Millennium -Project.org   
Improved global security: AGI has the potential to impact global security in both positive 
and negative ways. International cooperation can help to ensure that AGI is used for t he 
common good and to prevent its misuse for malicious purposes.  
 
Overall, international cooperation on the development of AGI has the potential to 
accelerate progress in this field, promote shared benefits, and address potential risks 
and challenges.  
 
Another question to ChatCPT: What should the European Union do to make sure 
artificial general intelligence is beneficial for humanity  
 
The European Union can take a number of measures to ensure that artificial general 
intelligence (AGI) is beneficial for humanity, such as:  
• Developing and implementing ethical guidelines and constraints for the 
development and use of AGI  
• Investing in research and development to support the advancement of AGI 
technology  
• Encouraging collaboration and partnerships among researc hers, scientists, and 
technologists working on AGI  
• Promoting diversity and inclusion in the scientific and technological fields to 
ensure diverse perspectives and prevent bias  
• Providing regular monitoring and evaluation to ensure that AGI is behaving in a 
safe and responsible manner  
• Encouraging transparency and accountability in the development and use of AGI  
• Ensuring that AGI is developed and tested in a secure and safe environment.  
 