 Chaos Computer Club Submission Global Digital Compact 
 Elina Eickstädt, Constanze Kurz  27 April 2023 
Preliminary remarks  ..................................................................................................3Human Rights online  ................................................................................................3Sustainably safer computer systems for everyone  .............................................3Recommendations to dry up the spyware market  .............................................4Data Protection  ...........................................................................................................5Protection through encryption  ..............................................................................5Biometric surveillance  ............................................................................................5Analysis of digital lifes ...........................................................................................6
2
Preliminary remarks The Chaos Computer Club (CCC) is the largest European hacker association and has worked on issues relating to technology and its impact on society for over forty years. Since the beginning of its existence, the CCC has recognized and propagated the opportunities and possibilities that digitization holds. Questions regarding communication, data protection, data retention, surveillance, hacking, voting computer, freedom of information, copyright and computer art have been at the heart of CCC’s efforts. This submissions is a compilation of demands and recommendations the CCC made with regards to the key topics of human rights online and data protection. As a hacker association CCC’s main focus is on the technical aspects and implications of regulations. The intransparent and overlaying bureaucracy of the process of the GDC shows all the indicators of missing participatory internet regulation processes we’ve seen in the past on national and EU level. The negotiation of the Internet’s future can only deliver what it promises with bringing all stakeholders, especially experts, and activists to the table. Policies that are negotiated behind closed doors have proven to be often badly crafted, dangerous, and only to be fixed with a great number of resources. Human Rights online Sustainably safer computer systems for everyone Digital Transformation in almost all areas of life has exposed certain human rights to particular threats, which have only arisen due to the existence of technologies. Especially the right to privacy, the right to freedom of assembly, and the right to freedom of expression. The fact that all communication via information technology devices is now digital, opens up new possibilities for surveilling thousands or even millions of people that simply did not exist before. Technical means to monitor, scan and analyze the data obtained were unthinkable in the pre-digital era, but today it is not only possible but is also being carried out. Among the greatest threats to human rights are the collection and evaluation of data, which are accumulated without a specific reason. Particularly in the area of telecommunications, it has become the norm to store data in advance. As noted by the UN High commissioner for Human Rights in his recent report on „The right to privacy in the digital age“, in addition to mass 1surveillance without any reason, the penetration of targeted surveillance into ever more intimate areas of people must be named as a significant and growing threat to human rights. The most personally sphere of people is now open to digital digital surveillance, if only because we have planted information technology devices in the middle of our lives.  A/HRC/51/17: The right to privacy in the digital age, 4 August 2022. 1https://www.ohchr.org/en/documents/thematic-reports/ahrc5117-right-privacy-digital-age3
A wide reaching form of surveillance both by private as well as state actors is also possible because of a worldwide market for computer sabotage and hacking, currently investigated by a Committee of Inquiry of the European Parliament which looks into the use of Pegasus and equivalent surveillance spyware. Spyware surveillance in any form endangers human rights as well 2as the security of the future of the internet, thus it must be countered by drying up this market of IT security vulnerabilities. Recommendations to dry up the spyware market 3End spyware purchases by intelligence agencies and police institutions The hoarding of unpatched IT security vulnerabilities by various authorities makes the Internet and almost all computer systems an unsafe place for all of us. The illusion of being in sole possession of acquired information about vulnerabilities seems childish considering the real and widely documented damage done to journalists, lawyers and opposition figures in dictatorships around the world by the very same vulnerabilities. The only real winners in this useless and counterproductive support of a shadow market in vulnerabilities are a bunch of morally jaded digital mercenaries. They provide zero-days to enemies of democracy around the world – but in the process also supply common cybercriminals for whom the falling crumbs of zero day haggling are enough to instigate regular waves of world wide blackmail Trojans. Mandatory processes to immediately fix known vulnerabilities All security vulnerabilities – regardless of how or to which government agency they became known – must be remedied immediately and in urgent cooperation with the manufacturer. In addition, all users of the affected projects and products must be forced to apply the corrections quickly. This is the only way to ensure that the black market, which depends on the novelty of zero days, is effectively left sitting on its rotten exploits from yesterday. No illegalisation of security research In order to curb the ongoing threat posed by a small and unscrupulous clique at the hubs of zero-day commerce, the prohibition of security research through the so-called German Hackerparagraph and comparable regulations 4in other countries must first be ended. Researchers who are being branded as criminals in the course of their IT security profession are potentially much more vulnerable to being embraced by real criminals.  Committee of Inquiry to investigate the use of Pegasus and equivalent surveillance spyware 2  https://www.europarl.europa.eu/committees/en/pega/home/highlights Chaos Computer Club, Thorsten Schröder: How to dry up the market for IT security 3vulnerabilities, 26 November 2022. https://www.ccc.de/en/updates/2022/zero-day-schwarzmarkt-trockenlegen Cf. https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/stgb/__202c.html44
Data Protection Protection through encryption Human rights activists, journalists or opposition members can leverage secure technical procedures to protect themselves and their sources. In many countries, these groups or individuals operate at great personal risk. It is therefore important for them to be able to communicate unobserved using secure tools. Encryption is fundamental for secure communication. It is essential that encryption methods are neither weakened nor undermined with backdoors. The protection of human rights worldwide is increasingly becoming a question of technology policy. People who are affected by or report on human rights violations are imperatively dependent on technical means to secure their work. All efforts in democratic states to restrict or puncture technical means of encrypting communications and information for the purposes of law enforcement and intelligence services lead directly to a drastic deterioration of the situation for these individuals in their countries. Biometric surveillance The most important customers for biometric systems like facial recognition systems, speech recognition, iris or fingerprint scanners are government institutions, followed by airports. In these two areas, more and more money is spent each year on the acquisition and maintenance of biometric surveillance systems worldwide. In addition, biometric surveillance is no longer used or planned on a selective basis, but on a large scale, and government agencies regularly store the biometric data. Biometric technologies are error-prone but have shown considerable progress in the last decade and thus become a threat to passers-by recedes into the background. The face in particular is typically exposed, so that optical scanning and recognition of biometric images can be carried out unnoticed. Errors that lead to spurious hits in many biometric software products are often discriminatory against certain groups of people and have inherent biases. 5Facial recognition as a screening measure threatens human rights and discriminates against groups of people, especially when it is automated. It is now one of the greatest threats to human rights and political participation. Therefore, we call on a ban on automated facial recognition in public, in particular its use by state actors. 
 Cf. NIST: Face Recognition Vendor Test. 5https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/face-recognition-vendor-test-frvt5
Analysis of digital lifes The technological trend is toward integrated surveillance that link data from all systems where digital traces of life is collected. People are tracked by their digital shadows, for example via data from payment transactions, public transport tickets, cell phone data, surveillance cameras with automatic facial recognition and by mining social media data streams. All these and other data sources are integrated and analyzed with data analytics software and also machine learning software. Systems suitable for implementing such holistic monitoring with multiple data sources analyzing mundane digital life traces of people should be banned. Funding priorities should be shifted to focus on technologies that protect against surveillance.
6