   
 
Intel Corporation  
Input to the Global Digital Compact  
Intel Corporation (Intel) welcomes the opportunity to provide input to the Global Digital 
Compact . 
At Intel, our purpose is to build world -changing technology that improves the life of every person 
on the planet. We strive every day to make a positive global impact and be good corporate 
citizens. Increasingly central to every aspect of human existence, technology is transforming our 
world at an accelerated pace. And at the heart of that technology: semiconductors. 
Semiconductors are the foundation of all innovation as the world becomes more digital, from 
powering our ability to work remotely, to staying connected with friends and family, to providing 
enhanced healthcare and autono mous vehicles.  Intel’s more than 1 21,000 employees worldwide 
are shaping the future with computing and connectivity technologies.  The transistor is the engine 
that powers every Intel processor. To build a modern computer chip, our engineers place billions 
of these tiny switches into an area no larger than a fingernail.  
The world is becoming more digital and  computing more pervasive. Semiconductors are the 
underlying technology powering the digitization of everything, which is being accelerated by four 
superpowers: ubiquitous compute, cloud -to-edge infrastructure, pervasive connectivity, and 
artificial intell igence (AI). Together these superpowers reinforce and amplify one another and  
will exponentially increase the world’s need for computing by packing even more processing 
capability onto ever -smaller microchips. We intend to lead the industry by harnessing t hese 
superpowers for our customers’ growth and our own.  Our product offerings provided end -to-end 
solutions, scaling from edge computing to 5G networks, Wi -Fi 6, the cloud, and the emerging 
fields of AI and autonomous driving.  
As part of our integrated dev ice manufacturer (IDM 2.0) strategy, Intel announced in 2021 and 
2022 plans to invest $40 billion to build new factories and expand in the US and Malaysia, and as 
much as 80 billion euros in the European Union for R&D and manufacturing expansion. We 
believ e our IDM 2.0 strategy will enable us to deliver leading process technology and products to 
meet growing demand, while providing superior capacity and supply resilience and an 
advantageous cost structure.  
Intel formed an alliance with 50 partners from For tune 500 companies, NGOs, and academia —
including Dell, World Wide Technology, and African Mobile Networks — to build the N50 Project . 
The project, part of the Intel RISE 2030 strategies and goals , aims to bring access to affordable 
digital content, applications, and services to the next 3.9 billion people to provide health, social, 
and financial benefits to marginalized  communities.  
Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger has supported UN General Assembly “ High -Level Thematic Debate on 
Digital Cooperation and Connectivity ” on 27 April 2021 and delivered a  speech .  
                                                                                                                                                      
 
Intel has also chaired the United Nations “Global Alliance for Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT) and Development ”. 
Aligned with Intel ’s corporate purpose  and RISE 2030 strategies and goals , Intel has rolled out 
“Intel Digital Readiness Programs ” globally in partnership with governments , academia, civil 
society, and industry stakeholders as a shared -value  initiative to demystify and democratize 
emerging technologies —including AI for Citizens, AI for Youth, AI for Future Workforce, AI for 
Current Workforce, and Digital Readiness for Leaders —aimed at empowering citizens, students, 
professionals, and leaders to participate in and benefit from a digital economy.  
We believe that the achievement of the SDGs will be critical to creating a life of dignity and 
opportunity for all, and we believe technology will play a key role in achieving  the SDGs. We use 
the goals below to inform the ongoing development of our strategies, initiatives, and long -term 
priorities, including our 2030 strategy and goals. Information communications technology (ICT) 
can play an enabling role in the implementation  of all of the SDGs. Intel, Nethope, and the UN 
Foundation developed an SDG ICT Playbook  that outlines technology trends, opportunities, and 
innovative cas e studies that global leaders can reference as they develop their strategies and 
actions to address the SDGs.  
Connect all people to the internet  
We need to bridge the digital divide, thereby creating a more accessible and inclusive future for 
all. This requires us to not only connect people to the internet (deployment), but also providing 
the tools and skills so they can effectively use the internet (adoption). Students need computers 
both in schools and at home for their education and digital equa l opportunity. New UN 
targets  include the connection of all households, schools, and digital skills by 2030.  According to 
UNESCO, Half of the total number of learners – some 826 million students – kept out of the 
classroom by the COVID -19 pandemic, do not  have access to a household computer and 43% 
(706 million) have no internet at home.  
Not only students but all household members can benefit from the computer at home. It will 
provide the connection of all household members and people in world. Digital li teracy and ICT 
skills are requirements for success in today’s knowledge economy and society. Integration of ICT 
in Education is a key enabler for digital skill development and broadband demand creation. 
Computers are essential for the realization of all SD Gs such as e -learning, e -health, e -commerce, 
e-agriculture, remote work and meetings, digital skill development programs for young 
generation on new ICT technologies like AI, programming, coding, and projects to empower 
women, girls, and other applications . 
Intel’s global broadband objectives are the same as that of most governments and consumers: 
we want to enable high -speed and high -quality, widespread, affordable broadband in all 
countries extending computing technology to connect and enrich the lives of  every person on 
                                                                                                                                                      
earth. High -speed and high -quality intelligent broadband networks can provide digital equity for 
SDGs to close the gaps, for example in education, health.  
Resolution 70/125 of the UN General Assembly and ITU Plenipotentiary 2022 Resolutio n 139 
underline the importance of high -speed broadband connectivity to bridge the digital divide.  
Schools and households need both high -speed broadband connectivity and computers. High -
speed broadband networks are also very important for the successful imp lementation of AI and 
other new applications such as video -based e -health (telemedicine), e -learning.  Therefore, it is 
also important to prioritize high -speed broadband connectivity for the economic development 
and digital equity. Intel is a leading suppl ier for 5G, Wi -Fi and other telecommunications 
equipment and devices. Making high -quality broadband more widespread and affordable and 
improving the cost and quality of data -rich applications will spur economic growth in many ways. 
Intel actively supports UN efforts such as ITU and Broadband Commission for accelerating new 
high -speed broadband technologies like 5G, Wi -Fi 6, G.fast (DSL), fiber that are key for school, 
household connectivity and new digital services and skills.  
Many ministers and other exec utives have also underlined the importance of high -speed 
broadband connectivity and introduced their strategies and projects including rural areas during 
ITU PP 22 Conference.  
Actions on Connectivity  
• Develop affordable national computer and broadband connectivity programs especially 
for students, households (through subsidies and incentives including sound tax policies).    
• Allocate enough licensed and unlicensed frequency spectrum for new high -speed 
broadband wireless technologies (like 5G and Wi -Fi 6) and accelerate the implementation 
of networks.  
• Effectively use Universal Service Fund and other financing mechanisms (such as 
development banks) for the high -speed broadband connectivity, computer progr ams for 
schools, universities, students, and digital skill development programs.   
• Connect all schools and classrooms with high -speed broadband technologies and 
establish computer labs according to need of digital skill programs such as on AI and 
coding.  
• Promote market -based broadband policies for widespread, high -speed, high -quality, 
affordable broadband.  
• Benefit from the experience of other successful countries such as following Universal 
Service Fund projects.  
Internet Fragmentation  
Governments and private sectors have invested trillions of US dollars for the existing and 
emerging interconnected, interoperable Internet networks and services ( provided by open 
                                                                                                                                                      
standards and formats, standardized by the Internet Engineering Task Force - IETF) . IETF operates 
under the auspices of the  Internet Society  as an international  non-profit organization. Internet 
Society, IETF, ICANN have very important leading roles on the development and interoperability 
of existing and future Internet for the wor ld’s economy and SDGs. We need to increase our 
support to these organizations and their leading role on Internet to prevent the fragmentation.  
Actions on Internet Fragmentation  
All organizations and governments should continue to support the activities of ISOC, IETF, ICANN 
and work together to prevent Internet fragmentation.  
Protect data  
The goal of Intel's data privacy policy approach is to enrich trust in technology through th e 
responsible access and use of data to add value to society and consumers' lives. To accomplish 
this goal, Intel encourages governments to focus on harmonized approaches to privacy 
protection that will continue to foster information technology innovation and economic growth.  
Intel’s security objective is in direct alignment with the goal of global governments: to promote 
trust in technology by enabling governments, businesses, and individuals to better secure their 
data, networks, and infrastructure. To ac complish this goal, we encourage governments to focus 
on non -partisan approaches to security that will foster information technology innovation and 
economic growth. Governments should promote policies that are globally scalable and flexible 
enough to addre ss the evolving security landscape by focusing on robust and transparent security 
solutions, encompassing the full stack. We believe they should develop risk -based, evidence -
driven, design -neutral approaches to security policy and be informed by consensus -driven 
processes. We also believe that Digital Trust – as a larger, evolving framework incorporating cyber 
security - is a human right for all consumers of technologies, and should be promoted by raising 
all users’ awareness of principles of security and b uilding trust in technology and the 
organizations providing them.  
At Intel, we believe in the enormous potential of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to improve people’s 
lives. AI is also a technology that must prioritize effective data protection to mitigate h arms. Two 
trends that are influencing AI and digital developments globally are: 1. Data analytics from the 
edge to the cloud, and 2. Increased mechanisms for data collection and creation.  
Actions on Protect Data  
a) Data privacy policy:  
1- Privacy legislation should promote innovation and free flow of data. Privacy legislation and 
policy should not restrict the movement of data.  
2- Privacy legislation should allow for flexibility rooted in a risk -based approach. Intel supports 
the passage of privacy  legislation that addresses the challenges and risks raised by technologies. 
                                                                                                                                                      
Legislation should promote Privacy by Design and organizational accountability to weigh privacy 
risks throughout the data lifecycle.  
3- Security is essential to good privacy. As d igital devices connect to the internet, sharing data 
among devices and the need to store data will grow. Robust security of networks and devices is 
critical. Any privacy law must recognize the need to process data for network and information 
security purpo ses. 
4- To align consumer expectations, enforcement of data privacy legislation must be predictable 
and consistent.   
b) AI privacy policy  
Success of innovation depends upon trust in emerging technologies, like AI and autonomous 
driving.  
1- New legislative  and regulatory initiatives should be comprehensive, technology neutral, and 
support free flow of data: horizontal legislation can encompass both data uses and technologies 
that fall outside existing sectoral laws and that are still unforeseen.  
2- Organiza tions should embrace risk -based accountability approaches, putting in place technical 
(privacy -by-design) or organizational measures (product development lifecycles and ethics 
review boards) to minimize privacy risks in AI.  
3- Automated decision making sho uld be fostered while augmenting with safeguards to protect 
individuals: legitimate interest should be acknowledged as legal basis for AI data processing. 
Industry and governments should work together on algorithm explainability and risk -based 
degrees of h uman oversight to minimize potential adverse impacts for citizens from automated 
decision -making.  
4- Governments should promote access to data, such as, opening government data, supporting 
reliable datasets available to all, fostering incentives for data s haring, investing in the 
development of voluntary international standards, and promoting diversity in datasets.  
5- Funding research in security is essential to protect privacy: in areas like homomorphic 
encryption, access to personal data can be minimized and protection enhanced.  
6- It takes data to protect data: to detect biases or cyber threats and to protect personal data, AI 
needs to process personal data.  
Regulation of Artificial Intelligence  
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is driving a new wave of econom ic progress with the ability to solve 
some of the world’s most difficult problems in healthcare, climate, and education. AI is projected 
to add more than $15 trillion to global GDP by 2030. To realize the potential of AI, governments 
need to create a publi c policy environment that fosters AI innovation, while also mitigating 
                                                                                                                                                      
negative societal consequences. The main drivers of public policy towards AI should be solving 
large societal problems and fostering economic progress. Accordingly, public policy must s upport 
industry efforts to bring AI benefits to the economy, to raise awareness and address citizens’ 
concerns, and to identify needs for regulatory intervention. Oversight by regulators will be 
essential for society to trust AI. At the same time, regulati ons should not create additional, 
unnecessary barriers to the positive social impacts of AI.  
Democratizing and demystifying AI as a technology, and closing the current digital skills gap, will 
be key to realizing its full potential. At Intel, we believe in furthering “Digital Readiness” for all. 
Digital Readiness comprises of the digital skills, t rust, and understanding of responsible usages of 
emerging technologies including AI. Governments should prioritize building digital readiness and 
educational programs on AI with public -private partnerships. These efforts should also 
emphasize the importanc e and potential of AI to help achieve the 17 SDGs.  
Intel Digital Readiness Programs aim to skill 30 million people in 30 countries in partnership with 
30,000 institutions for current and future jobs by 2030. To date, we have reached 27 countries, 
4 millio n people, and 23,000 institutions. With the AI for Youth program, we’ve provided AI 
curriculum and resources to nearly 1 million middle and high school students and continue to 
scale the program globally. Through AI for Future Workforce program, we are pro viding AI 
educational content to community colleges and higher educational institutions to prepare 
technical and non -technical students for the jobs of tomorrow. Through our AI for Citizens 
program, we provide public awareness and understanding of AI for a ll, non -technical audiences.  
We also organize “Intel® AI Global Impact Festival” annual Digital Readiness celebration for next -
generation technologists and educators, with governments, academia, and communities, to 
showcase AI innovation and impact, align ed with UN Sustainable Development Goals.  
Actions on Artificial Intelligence  
Remove barriers and create a legal and policy environment that supports AI  so that the 
responsible development and use of AI is not inadvertently derailed. Promote risk-based 
accountability approaches combined with flexible regulatory guidelines to allow organizations to 
adopt the most appropriate internal processes and policies. Expand general legal principles to AI 
to assess if existing laws and regulations that ma y prevent autonomy in certain tasks are still 
justified.  
Foster Innovation and Open Development: To better understand the impact of AI and explore 
the broad diversity of AI implementations, public policy should encourage investment in AI R&D. 
Governments s hould support the controlled testing of AI systems to help industry, academia, and 
other stakeholders improve the technology.  
 
                                                                                                                                                      
Create New Human Employment Opportunities and Protect People’s Welfare: AI will change 
the way people work. Public policy in support of adding skills to the workforce and promoting 
employment across different sectors should enhance  employment opportunities  while also 
protecting people’s welfare.  
 
Implement AI Digital Skill programs for youth, citizens, and workforce . Integrate AI skills 
programs across educational levels and establish AI labs equipped with the proper resources for 
students to explore and bu ild AI.      
 
Liberate Data Responsibly: AI is powered by access to data. While maintaining security and data 
privacy, machine learning algorithms improve by absorbing more data over time; data acquisition 
is imperative to achieving more enhanced model dev elopment and training. Keeping data moving 
will help machine learning and deep learning reach its full potential.  
 
Rethink Privacy: Privacy approaches like The Fair Information Practice Principles and Privacy by 
Design have withstood the test of time and t he evolution of new technology. But with innovation, 
we have had to “rethink” how we apply these models to new technology.  
  
Require Accountability for Ethical Design and Implementation: The social implications of 
computing have grown and will continue to expand as more people have access to 
implementations of AI. Public policy should work to identify and mitigate discrimination caused 
by the use of AI and encourage designing in protections against these harms.  
 
 
 
 
 